

Friday, December 11, 2015 • 19:18Z

Financial Times (web site) • 763 words

COP21: Climate activists target
sceptics in Paris campaign

By Michael Stothard and Pilita Clark in Paris



Paris has seen men running around in green felt tree-suits, a roaring mechanical polar bear and liberal use of face paint.

Amid the light-hearted fanfare generated by environmental activists in the French capital, however, the climate summit has also been notable for a hardening of tone against perceived climate-change deniers - several of whom have been subject to highly personalised campaigns.

Fiona Wild, a representative of the mining group BHP Billiton at the talks, flew back to Australia on Thursday after becoming the focus of an aggressive campaign against individuals in Paris accused of trying to water down the final climate agreement.

Ms Wild and several others had their faces plastered on more than 1,000 large "wanted" posters, which were put up around luxury hotels in Paris. The targets were accused of being "climate criminals" trying to "keep fossil fuels at the centre of human development".

"Wanted" flyers were also handed out around the Metro stations near the conference centre in northern Paris, where delegates from almost 200 countries are attempting to reach a binding accord to cut greenhouse gas emissions.

A spokesperson for BHP Billiton said Ms Wild flew back to Australia before the end of the summit "following a very concerning campaign by French activists . . . which incorrectly claimed BHP Billiton [and Ms Wild] were climate-change deniers".

One person close to Ms Wild said she had also been warned that more personal attacks against her were to come. The BHP Billiton spokesperson called the campaign "highly personalised and unfair".

The crusade reflected the generally hostile attitude to climate sceptics in Paris, with senior policy figures making clear that this time they were not welcome and their point of view was no longer valid.

"These people are so out of touch with science that they believe rising sea levels don't matter, because in their view, the extra water is just going to spill out over the sides of a flat Earth," said John Kerry, the US secretary of state, to laughter.

Emma Ruby-Sachs, acting executive director of Avaaz, the global pressure group that organised the "wanted" posters, said: "Ministers should be listening to their people, not polluters, and [should] refuse meetings with lobbyists."

Others on the "wanted" list included Benjamin Sporton, head of the World Coal Association; Marc Morano, who runs the climate sceptic website ClimateDepot.com; Myron Ebell, director of the US think-tank Competitive Enterprise Institute; Bjorn Lomborg, Danish author of The Skeptical Environmentalist ; and James Taylor, senior fellow at the Heartland Institute, another US libertarian think-tank.

Some were more relaxed than others about being branded "criminals". Mr Morano, who premiered his new climate-sceptic documentary Climate Hustle, responded to a Financial Times request for comment by sending a photograph of himself posing by his "wanted" sign with an expression of mock fear.

"You have to wonder how strong their scientific case really is if activists resort to accusing anyone who disagrees of being a wanted criminal," he said. "I did not let any low-brow intimidation tactics impact my trip to COP21."

Others took it more seriously. Mr Ebell said it was a concern in a "free society" that in a conference attended by thousands of environmental non-government organisations, activists would want to "exclude and silence" a small group of "climate realists".

Mr Sporton said the World Coal Association was "fully committed to playing a central role in reaching an effective and sustainable outcome in Paris", while Mr Taylor said it was "vile" and "hateful" and "libellous".

Mr Lomborg denied "silly" claims that he was funded by any fossil-fuel interests.

He said he was being attacked for his research showing that the carbon-cutting promises made so far - which will form the heart of the Paris agreement - would cut global temperatures by only 0.05 degrees Celsius by 2100 and would cost $1tn a year.

The stated aim of the Paris agreement is to lower greenhouse gas emissions in order to reduce the expected rise in global temperature by the end of the century from roughly 4C to less than 2C (above pre-industrial levels).

Greenpeace campaigners said they had launched a sting operation posing as representatives of energy companies and offering to pay two climate academics to write papers on the benefits of coal and carbon emissions. They said the offers had been accepted.

The environmental group said this "exposed how fossil-fuel companies can secretly pay academics at leading American universities to write research". The two US scientists involved said they had nothing to be ashamed of, and stood by all their research.
