Solutions

Vol. 40, No. 2

Spring 2009

Greening the China supply chain 4

The race to reinvent energy
PRESSING THE START BUTTON ON AMERICAN INNOVATION


Saved! An undersea wilderness 16

The future rainforest 7
Rainforests contain half the Earth's species and are vital to many life systems. Today, they also hold the key to a global climate treaty.

President Obama's policies present a dramatic opportunity to create jobs and solve global warming. Now Environmental Defense Fund must get Congress to act.

Less than a year ago, candidate Barack Obama promised an about-face in the nation's environmental policies. The economic stimulus bill passed in February, with its intention to slash America's dependence on fossil fuels, represents the government's biggest commitment to environmental protection in years. But major hurdles still lie ahead.

"This is a stunning departure from the past eight years," says Environmental Defense Fund president Fred Krupp. "Between the stimulus bill and the climate legislation taking shape in Congress, we're opening a new chapter in the fight against global warming." EDF helped shape the final stimulus package, which includes the following:
∑ $20 billion investment in energy efficiency for buildings
∑ $17.7 billion for mass transit ∑ Funds for renewable energy research ∑ Rebates for the purchase of greener
appliances
Now we and our allies must win support from Congress for strong climate action. We've enlisted strategic partners in labor

and manufacturing to help show Congress that a cap on global warming pollution will create vibrant industries and jobs.
ADVISING THE ADMINISTRATION
Shortly after the November election, Krupp put our study Manufacturing Climate Solutions into the hands of Obama energy advisor Carol Browner. Her enthusiastic response paid a big dividend. Vice President Joe Biden named Environmental Defense Fund as expert panelist for the opening meeting of his Task Force on Middle Class Families, charged with making green jobs a pathway to a strong middle class.
The new opportunities are crucial for workers like Samuel Pagan. A former
Continued on p.6

WHERE WE STAND By Fred Krupp, President
A new deal for the environment

T. Charles Erickson

≠≠≠≠≠ More Americans now work
in the wind industry than in coal mining.
≠≠≠≠≠

Franklin Roosevelt launched the New Deal in 1933 to help lift America out of the Great Depression. Most historians agree, however, that it was World War II that really turned things around.
Today, we are fighting another global war--against climate change. President Obama has launched that war in earnest by calling on Congress to enact a cap on carbon emissions. He has appointed a strong environmental team, including long-time EDF board member Dr. Jane Lubchenco as head of NOAA, the primary climate science agency.
Retooling America's energy infrastructure will not only help save the plan-

et, it also could save the economy. How? By creating jobs for people like Mike Gonzer, a plant manager in Michigan recently laid off from the auto industry but now working assembling wind turbines.
In a recent meeting at the White House, Lawrence Summers, Obama's chief economic advisor, told me that the key to economic recovery is to remake the energy sector. He likened government's role to that of a pair of scissors. One blade would be green spending in the Recovery and Reinvest ment Act; the second blade would be a cap-and-trade program for carbon dioxide. Together, they can help us cut our way out of the recession.

Creating a clean future
Technology is on the brink of producing breakthroughs in the fight against global warming. Entrepreneurs are harvesting energy not just from the sun and wind but from ocean waves, grasses and even algae.
That's the message of the New York Times bestseller Earth: The Sequel by EDF president Fred Krupp and Miriam Horn, now in paperback from W. W. Norton. The new
edition updates progress by featured companies and includes vivid illustrations of how cutting-edge technologies like cellulosic ethanol and wave energy actually work.
"Krupp does what might seem impossible--he delivers a global warming book that leaves you feeling hopeful." ≠Time
"If you are worried that the world is heading toward climate catastrophe, here's a book to lift your spirits." ≠Harvard Business Review

Dealing with economic turmoil and global warming together makes perfect sense: Behind every clean energy technology--from wind turbines and solar cells to carbon capture and advanced lighting--a parts-and-labor supply chain runs through the heartland of U.S. manufacturing.
For example, Indiana-based SunRise Solar, a maker of solar-powered attic fans, gets plastic and stainless steel brackets from local plants, motors from Pennsylvania, wire from Illinois and thermostats from California. The fast-growing company has helped keep many other U.S. companies afloat in these rough times.
Strong cap-and-trade climate legislation will rapidly create new markets and millions of new jobs in virtually every sector of the economy. Rep. Henry Waxman (D-CA), chairman of the House Energy and Commerce Committee, has vowed to have a climate bill on the floor by Memorial Day. Momentum is also building in the Senate. Congress should do all it can to pass a strong bill, and quickly, in order to have maximum leverage for December's UN climate talks in Copenhagen.
As the legislation moves forward, we will stand guard on Capitol Hill to make sure that no last-minute loopholes are inserted in the dead of night. The future of the planet is at stake.
Solutions
Editor: Peter Klebnikov
Environmental Defense Fund, 257 Park Ave. South, New York, NY 10010. Main number 212-505-2100.
Membership questions: Call 800-684-3322 or email members@edf.org
Mailbag: Mail to address above, call 800-927-6464 or email editor@edf.org
©2009 Environmental Defense Fund. Published quarterly in New York, NY. ASSN 0163-2566
New York ∑ Austin ∑ Bentonville, AR ∑ Boston Boulder ∑ Los Angeles ∑ Raleigh ∑ Sacramento San Francisco ∑ Washington ∑ Beijing, China

Talk back

Please correct yourself!
Please look at the picture on the cover of your Sushi Selector. Sushi is rice mixed with vinegar and sugar. It may have tuna rolled inside it, or a number of other fish products placed on it, but sushi is not fish. Please correct yourself! Bets Lawrence, Hawaii
Our scientist Tim Fitzgerald responds: Mr. Lawrence is correct--technically sushi is just vinegared rice, not fish. Howe ver, we decided to go with an image and title recognizable to most U.S. sushi lovers. See edf.org/seafood.
What about wind pollution?
I worked on a maintenance crew servicing 259 wind turbines in northwest Iowa.
While I believe power produced from wind turbines is a good alternative source, there are some problems: moving the energy produced is not efficient because of inadequate transmission systems; there can be pollutants from operation of the turbines; and there needs to be recycling or cleanup after the useful life of the wind turbines. Roger Skelton, Rembrandt, Iowa
Our renewable energy specialist Colin Meehan comments: We currently have enough transmission capacity in most of the windy states to allow a

significant amount of new wind power to be developed. Passing a national cap on global warming pollution will spur even more renewable energy development, as well as the transmission infrastructure it requires.
However, as you point out, wind farms can create local environmental problems, from leaking oil to serious habitat damage. On the positive side, wind farms create much less local environmental damage than coal, natural gas or nuclear power plants. And much of the material is recyclable. In fact, a small cottage industry is already developing around remanufacturing old wind turbines.
To address these issues, EDF helped found the American Wind Wildlife Institute, a consortium of wind developers and environmental organizations. The institute is working to establish rules and incentives for wind developers to site, build, operate and decommission turbines in an environmentally conscious manner.
Help us improve Solutions!
Would you like to influence what EDF writes about in Solutions? Email editor@ edf.org to join our Reader Panel. Please include your name and mailing address in your email, and feel free to mention any suggestions when you write. We want to hear from you!

What they're saying about Environmental Defense Fund
"Without the persistence, devotion and long-term support of EDF, Hawaii would not have this landmark conservation program."
Paul J. Conry, Hawaii's administrator of Forestry and Wildlife, on EDF program preventing pollution from reaching Hawaii's coral reefs.

Obama advisor joins EDF
Holstein negotiated help for the Klamath.
Elgie Holstein remembers the first time he sat down with PacifiCorp to negotiate removing the utility's dams from the Klamath River in California and Oregon--the focus of years of contentious debate among farmers, environmentalists and Indian tribes.
"PacifiCorp had really been beaten up in the press," recalls Holstein. "They were wary." Instead of ultimatums, Holstein offered them science. "I suggested we cooper- Water diplomat ate on a plan for ex- Elgie Holstein a mining water quality related to the dams," he says. "They jumped on it."
Negotiators reached a tentative agreement last fall to remove the dams in what may be the largest river restoration project in U.S. history. Holstein insists his role was small--he left the process last year to advise the Obama campaign on energy--but injecting facts into an emotional debate helped build trust among the negotiators.
Holstein will bring his skills in negotiating difficult water issues to EDF as the head of our Center for Rivers and Deltas. "Unraveling longstanding conflicts and healing the environment in places like the Colorado River Delta will take creative thinking and an evenhanded approach," says Holstein. "I came to Environmental Defense Fund because it is recognized for both."

PURCHASING POWER
With EDF's help, Wal-Mart takes green business global

Call it a smart business decision. To satisfy the growing demand for green building materials, a California-based startup called CleanBoard now manufactures drywall in a solar-powered factory, using residue from coal-fired power plants as raw material. Even its paper coating is recycled.
"To achieve our goals, we examined every aspect of our supply chain from the sourcing of raw materials to the transportation of finished goods," explains the company's founder, Rod MacGregor.
Imagine if a single retailer could demand such environmental performance from thousands of factories? Environmental Defense Fund set out to help achieve this goal.
The products we buy today are only as green as the energy and materials that go into them--the supply chain. Not long ago, it was common for manufacturers to oversee a product's entire life cycle. Today, that model has been replaced by a vast global supply chain moving products from distant factories to your neighborhood mall.
The environmental costs of this supply chain are immense. For example, U.S. demand for products from China-- $321 billion in 2007--has contributed to China's monumental environmental challenges: fouled air, despoiled rivers and a growing share of the world's global warming emissions.

Wal-Mart wants to green its Chinese supply chain.
A GREENER VISION FOR CHINA
As China's biggest export client, Wal-Mart has taken a special interest in greening China's supply chain and has the clout to make things happen. When the retailer recently invited 1,000 of its Chinese suppliers to an environmental summit in Beijing, suppliers were eager to attend. The company announced ambitious goals:

GREENING THE SUPPLY CHAIN
In building a child's crib, a manufacturer must focus on every step of the process--from the trees used, to transport, to ease of recycling.

CRIB

ETHICAL SOURCING Trees are tagged for tracing. Logging practices protect communities, air, water and wildlife habitat.

CRIB

MANUFACTURING Parts are milled to specifications that are safe for workers, consumers and the environment.

CRIB

STORE

POINT OF SALE Information for consumer includes place of origin and chemicals used in manufacture.

CRIB CRIB CRIB

STORE

TRANSPORT Trucks use clean technology, reduce idling and travel the most direct route.

CRIB CRIB

PACKAGING Crib assembled and packaged in boxes made from post-consumer recycled materials.

Icons by Funnel, Inc.; background photo Jim Brandenburg/ Minden Pictures

STORE

CUSTOMER USE STORE
Crib is easily assembled. Packaging is curbside recyclable.

4 Environmental Defense Fund Solutions

STORE

REUSE Crib is not a disposable product, rather is passed on to family and friends.

END OF LIFE No longer useful as a crib, recyclable parts are recycled.

∑ Wal-Mart's top 200 suppliers in China are to improve energy

efficiency 20% by 2012. The company's factory audits also

will look at air emissions, wastewater discharges and the han-

dling of toxic substances.

∑ By 2012, all direct suppliers must source 95% of their produc-

tion from factories with Wal-Mart's highest ratings for envi-

ronmental and social practices.

"We're showing suppliers that through this lens of sustain-

ability, there are actually cost-saving opportunities," says Matt

Kistler, Wal-Mart's senior vice president for sustainability.

60,000

As the only nonprofit with offices in Beijing and WalMart's home town of Bentonville, AR, we work closely with

Wal-Mart suppliers worldwide

the company on supply chain issues. We take no money from Wal-Mart, but the part-

nership is strategic for both parties.

"The biggest opportunity for creating environmental change

is the estimated 90% of Wal-Mart's environmental footprint at-

tributed to its 60,000 worldwide suppliers," says Elizabeth

Sturcken, our managing director for corporate partnerships.

Compliance remains a thorny issue. With EDF support,

Wal-Mart has changed its standard contract to require supplier

certification of compliance with all Chinese environmental laws.

FROM SEAFOOD TO FOREST PRODUCTS

Wal-Mart is examining its full range of products. For instance,

it wants all the seafood it sells in the United States to be certi-

fied as sustainable by 2011.

When EDF determined

there was no credible certi-

fication for farmed seafood,

we collaborated with allies

to strengthen the industry

association charged with

aquaculture certification.

Wal-Mart is reforming

its wood purchases and look-

ing to groups like EDF and

World Wildlife Fund for

guidance. With its supply

chain in the Far East

plagued by illegal logging

and phony labeling, WalMart is switching to more transparent lumber sources

We helped Wal-Mart set strict standards for farmed seafood.

around the world. "We need a clear chain of custody from start to

finish," explains our project manager Michelle Harvey.

We want our work with Wal-Mart to be emulated by other

large retailers. Environmental improvements to the intricate trail that

links the world's markets won't happen overnight, but the process is

well underway. EDF project manager Andrew Hutson says, "As

smart companies find real cost savings, the concept is gaining steam."

AP Photos

Energy-conscious companies have much to learn from installations like this Sun Edison solar farm.

Finally, a place to share green innovations

When Environmental Defense Fund and FedEx devel-

oped a cleaner, more fuel-efficient delivery truck, we

went directly to other delivery companies to share the

innovation. Now many fleets are trying out the new die-

sel-electric hybrid technology.

Our new Innovation

Exchange website will make it easier for companies to share such promising ideas faster. "Major companies have

See how the FedEx hybrid electric truck works in a short video at edf.org/FedExStory

come to us saying they

want to make their operations sustainable but don't know how

to go about it," says David Witzel, director of the exchange. "A

knowledge-sharing network was needed."

For a wide variety of industries, the Innovation

Exchange offers case studies, networking opportunities

and a frequently updated blog. Soon, expanded interactive

features will allow businesses to share their experiences

online and sign up

Information guru David Witzel is overseeing our new Innovation Exchange. edf.org/innovation

for training programs. The information is free.
"In today's

tough environ-

ment, no compa-

ny can afford to miss out on proven strategies to cut costs

and build reputation," says Gwen Ruta, our vice president

of corporate partnerships. "The Innovation Exchange pro-

vides the information and inspiration for companies to

achieve market leadership and meet key environmental

demands worldwide."

Among the first visitors to the new exchange:

employees of Microsoft, Nortel, Wells Fargo and other

leading corporations.

Find latest updates at edf.org 5

Zinn 

Countering climate falsehoods
Continued from p.1

Paul Glendell/Peter Arnold Eileen Colton

Job generator: Each wind turbine contains about 8,000 parts.
Pennsylvania steelworker, Pagan was looking for more job stability. With a little training, he easily stepped into a new career assembling the structural backbones of wind turbines. "It's a new industry," he says. "There's opportunity here."
"Our nation is rich with a skilled workforce that is waiting for the economic opportunity that cap-and-trade legislation will bring," says Krupp.
How climate action will affect jobs is the subject of a pitched battle that may determine the fate of climate legislation. Opponents in the oil industry and the U.S. Chamber of Commerce are again spending millions to mislead Americans with the falsehood that climate policy is too expensive in a recession. Similar arguments about gas prices stymied a climate bill in 2008.
This time, however, we are in a position to win. "In the fight for climate change legislation, we have advantages we've never had before," said Krupp. "We have solid majorities supporting legislation in both houses of Congress. We have sympathetic committee chairs to guide the action. And we now have a president who understands the nature of the emergency. The stars are aligning at just the right time."
WHAT YOU CAN DO: Send a message to your senators and representative urging them to help unleash our green energy future; visitedf.org/capcarbonnow
6 Environmental Defense Fund Solutions

LESS CARBON = MORE JOBS

When Jackie Roberts, EDF director of sustainable technologies, began to research how the U.S. job market will benefit from global warming legislation, she didn't expect to deliver her work directly to the vice president of the United States. But that's exactly what happened on February 27, when Roberts and EDF president Fred Krupp met with Vice President Joe Biden and several cabinet officers, including Energy Secretary Steven Chu and Labor Secretary Hilda Solis.
Roberts' new website, lesscarbonmorejobs.org, profiles 1,200 companies in the renewable energy and energy efficiency fields from Florida to Colorado primed to create new jobs when Congress enacts a cap on global warming pollution. Released at the launch of Biden's task force, the maps show hundreds of communities in coal country, the rust belt and other manufacturing regions poised to benefit.
A POTENT MESSAGE TO CONVINCE CONGRESS
Our goal is to show members of Congress how a cap on carbon will create economic opportunities for their constituents.

Our re-

search found that

42% of the new-

energy companies

surveyed had

growth in sales

over the past one

to two years.

Half were planning to hire more staff. Many were

Jackie Roberts: The White House called.

small companies, a key engine of U.S.

economic growth.

Abe Breehey, an official with the

International Brotherhood of Boilermak-

≠≠≠≠≠ A wind company hires former autoworkers in
Michigan. ≠≠≠≠≠

ers, an EDF ally, said, "The demand for climate solutions will create job opportunities across the economy. We can put American ingenuity to work to reduce emissions, with all the necessary labor and materials to make it happen."
Among the business leaders highlighted is Jeff Metts, president of
Dowding Industries, a Michigan manufacturer hiring laid-off autoworkers to build wind turbine components.
"This business is growing exponentially," Metts said. "We've tapped into a workforce eager to apply their skills from previous jobs, and the result has been incredible. We're ready to do much more."

Our new green company website, (lesscarbonmorejobs.org): 1,200 bright spots in a dark economy.

Valuing forests enough to save them

Frans Lanting

One day in December 2002, Herculano Porto thought the world was coming to an end. Machete in hand, he was clearing brush from the forest floor beneath 150-foot-tall Brazil nut trees in Par· state in the Brazilian Amazon when he saw four men with guns and chainsaws coming through the forest.

Herculano, who makes a precarious living collecting nuts and fishing, gathered his things and paddled back across the Anfrizio River to his home. Gradually, all around him, the forest began to fall.
For the last two decades, similar scenes have been playing out across the Amazon. Each year, ranchers, farmers and loggers have cleared and burned some four million
137unique species
become extinct every day due to tropical deforestation
acres of rainforest--an area nearly the size of New Jersey--releasing massive quantities of greenhouse gases into the atmosphere. Business as usual, some models predict, could destroy half the Amazon forest by 2050.
On that December day, Herculano didn't challenge the intruders. But over the next two years he defied death threats and teamed up with Environmental Defense Fund partners to help establish an

"extractive reserve." Inside the reserve, clear-cutting is prohibited but forest dwellers can continue their fishing and nut gathering. In exchange for land rights, education and health care, Herculano and other ribeirinhos, or river folk, agreed to manage the forest sustainably.
"Extractive reserves and indigenous lands, where people on the ground have a direct stake in the forest's survival, offer the best protection for rainforests," says our anthropologist Dr. Stephan Schwartzman, who has spent three decades working in the Amazon. Using satellite data, Schwartzman has documented that reserves stop deforestation.
Extractive reserves, indigenous lands and parks now cover nearly 40% of the Amazon. But that leaves huge swaths of forest unprotected. And in practice it has been difficult to protect sparsely populated areas because of pressure from ranchers, illegal clearing and a lack of economic incentives.
When a group of rice farmers recently challenged the existence of the four million acre Raposa Serra do Sol

Indigenous Reserve near the Venezuelan border, EDF funded our partner, the Instituto Socio-ambiental, to bring in an indigenous lawyer from Raposa to argue before Brazil's Supreme Court, the first indigenous attorney to do so. In a significant victory, the court ruled to support the reserve.
A GLOBAL SOLUTION
Still, the clearing and burning of rainforests continues--in Brazil, Indonesia and elsewhere. Worldwide, driven by the profits to be made from tropical hardwoods, soybeans and beef, between 20 and 40 million acres of rainforest are lost annually.
Tropical deforestation not only destroys ecosystems, it produces nearly 20% of the planet's global warming
In 2005, we

joined with Brazil-

ian allies to propose

a solution: provide

incentives that

make rainforests

worth more alive

than dead. Our

proposal would

offer compensation

from industrialized

nations in the form

of tradable carbon

credits to develop-

ing nations that re-

duce deforestation.

It would also allow

them to modernize

their economies.

The concept,

Will we continue to do this to the "lungs" of the planet?

known as Reducing

Emissions from De-

emissions. "Any plan to address global forestation and Degradation, or REDD,

warming must include tropical forests, gained traction at recent UN climate talks in

or it will fail," says EDF Climate direc- Poland, ensuring that it will be on the agen-

tor Peter Goldmark. "The world has

da in Copenhagen this December, when the

just one chance and little time to get

next climate treaty will be negotiated.

this right."

Meanwhile, at our partners' sug-

gestion, Brazil has pledged to cut deforestation 70% over the next decade. "This is enormously important," says Schwartzman. "It is the first time a major developing country has stepped up and made a commitment to bring down its total emissions."
When there are profits to be made by keeping tropical forests standing, the same entrepreneurial energy that has brought them down at such an alarming
≠≠≠≠≠ As long as forests are worth
more as cattle ranches or palm oil plantations, forests will continue to disappear.
≠≠≠≠≠
rate will become an equally powerful force for their protection.
"As long as forest lands are worth more as cattle ranches or palm oil plantations, forests will disappear," says Schwartzman. "An international carbon market can give them the value they need to survive."

Peter Arnold

Remembering CHICO MENDES

Twenty years ago, the legendary union activist Chico Mendes was gunned down by an enraged cattle rancher irked that he'd been denied the right to cut down a tract of Brazilian rainforest.
Mendes' voice may have been silenced, but his legacy lives on. 8 Environmental Defense Fund Solutions

Because Mendes had won international environmental prizes, his murder, unlike the 1,500 or so previous murders for hire in land conflicts in Brazil, became world news.
Illiterate until age 18, Mendes had eked out a living as a rubber tapper, collecting latex from the Amazon's rubber trees. Yet he rose to become Brazil's environmental conscience. He not only organized his fellow tappers into a rural workers' union but also formed them into human barriers whenever cattle ranchers threatened the rainforest that was their livelihood.
In December, on the 20th anniversary of his assassination, EDF anthropologist Dr. Stephan Schwartzman traveled to Brazil to receive the Chico Mendes Prize. The Acre state government recognized 20 people who were important in Mendes' life. "I was deeply honored to be among them," says Schwartzman.
In 1987, Schwartzman had brought Mendes to Washington, DC, to press development banks to curtail loans for Brazil's road-building projects until local people's rights were considered.
Our alliance forced the Brazilian government to change its policies. As part of the Mendes legacy, the extractive reserves he helped create have become a bulwark against deforestation in the Amazon--and a source of hope in solving the world's climate crisis.

J.B. Forbes

Illustration by Alan Baker

Detach and save this illlustration.
Why we need to save rainforests
Here are five reasons:

BIODIVERSITY Half of the Earth's species live in rainforests; there are more fish species in Amazonian waterways than in the entire Atlantic Ocean.

CULTURAL DIVERSITY More than 350 indigenous and ethnic groups have depended on the Amazon rainforest for their livelihoods for centuries.
CLIMATE Rainforests act as the world's thermostat by regulating temperatures and weather patterns worldwide.

MEDICINAL BENEFITS 70% of plants identified as having anti-cancer properties are found in the rainforest, according to the U.S. National Cancer Institute.

CARBON STORAGE Standing tropical forests are huge carbon vaults, locking up 28% of the total amount of carbon in global vegetation.
Environmental Defense Fund

Green living

Kids who dream in green

THE NEXT WAVE OF ENVIRONMENTAL ACTIVISTS IS THE YOUNGEST YET

The popular view that kids raised on TV and the Internet are fated to become passive consumers is contradicted by a new wave of informed environmental activism that reaches all the way down to elementary school.
Jordan Reichgut and Alex Scaperotta were only in third grade when a school screening of Al Gore's documentary about climate change, An Inconvenient Truth, inspired them to become environmental campaigners. The pair, now fifth graders at Cider Mill School in Wilton, CT, launched "Little People, Big Changes," which now has a website and a solid record of accomplishment.
Alex and Jordan regularly team up to talk to student groups and set up informational card tables at supermarkets, libraries and Earth Day celebrations. Largely through their efforts, nearly 200 families in the town of Wilton signed up to pay extra on their utility bills to ensure that renewable energy goes into the regional grid. The signups have earned Wilton a pair of solar panels to be installed at town schools.

The return of flower power: Children are taking pollution into their own hands.

TAKING ACTION LOCALLY
Heeding the slogan,"Think globally. Act locally," the boys created an anti-idling campaign to convince motorists to fight climate change (and local air pollution) by not leaving their cars and trucks running.
According to a new Environmental Defense Fund report, Idling Gets You Nowhere, idling cars and trucks in New York

City alone produce 760 tons of smogforming nitrogen oxides every year. That's the equivalent of 3,000 trucks, each driving a million miles. Pollutants from needlessly running engines are associated with a variety of health risks including cancer, asthma and heart disease--and children are especially vulnerable.
"If you're stopped for more than ten seconds, you save fuel by turning off the engine," Alex said. "So we created a slogan, `If you're stopped for more than ten, turn it off and on again.'" Jordan and Alex created bumper stickers and t-shirts that spread their message all over town. For their efforts they were awarded a Climate Change Leadership Award from Connecticut Governor Jodi Rell.

ADVOCATING GREENER SCHOOL BUSES
Some 1,500 miles away in Austin, TX, another group of fifth graders also zeroed in on unnecessary vehicle idling. Their campaign at Casis Elementary pushed the school to educate parents about the dangers of idling. "It might not have an impact on the world, but it might have an impact on our neighborhood," said fifth-grader Isaac Brown.
Similarly, EDF has been helping youth groups fight for laws to reduce school bus idling. In the Conroe district near Houston, we recruited student volunteers to carry test equipment in their backpacks

Alex Scaperotta had a bright idea for cutting pollution.
as they traveled on the buses. "We found that the air kids were breathing inside the bus was sometimes five to ten times worse than the air outside because of diesel pollution," said our staff scientist Elena Craft.

Alex von Kleydorff

CLEANING UP THE NEIGHBORHOOD
The new wave of children's environmental activism cuts across income levels. In 1998 three 14-year-olds in Brooklyn's Sunset Park neighborhood founded the Environmental Enforcers as part of UPROSE, a Latino community organization. The group's work includes air monitoring of diesel trucks on the Gowanus Expressway, which bisects their neighborhood.
Joaquin Brito, a 17-year-old volunteer, started out by collecting air samples. In 2007 he testified before a state commission on improving city air quality. Brito plans to study environmental engineering in college this fall. "Facing our environmental problems is something we have to do for our future," he says.
These young people do seem to think more about the future than earlier generations did. Their hope is to set an example. They're planting seeds, and working to ensure that they take firm root.
--Jim Motavalli

Going to work to defend the desert

When the Bureau of Land Management designated a section of California's Mojave Desert as the site of a radioactive waste dump, Hannah Bentley, a prominent environmental lawyer, went to work. She joined forces with Native American tribes and environmental groups and together they won protection for the area as critical habitat for the endangered desert tortoise. From that day on, she was able to camp in the desert she had helped protect. It remains one of her proudest achievements.
Bentley goes to work each day on behalf of the planet: preserving endangered species habitat, protecting vulnerable populations from unjust environmental harm and helping frame policy around California's historic global warming act.
Bentley has bolstered her environmental legacy by designating Environmental Defense Fund as a beneficiary of her IRA and 401(k) retirement plans. Gifts through estate plans provide EDF with resources to meet the most serious environmental challenges of the future.
"As an environmental lawyer, I have long realized the importance of talking with all parties," she says. "I like the way EDF takes the big picture view and makes an effort not to alienate key players. With its ability to build bridges, EDF will be needed more than ever in the years ahead."

Hannah Bentley with husband Harvey Toyama
Leave a legacy
To include EDF in your will or trust, we suggest this language:
"I hereby give ____to Environmental Defense Fund, Incorporated, a not-for-profit membership organization incorporated by the laws of the State of New York, having as its principal address 257 Park Avenue South, New York, NY 10010."

NEWS FROM THE FIELD

Hope for endangered Gulf sea turtles

Sea turtles have been around for at least 110 million years, but today all of them are either endangered or threatened. Off the west coast of Florida, endangered loggerhead turtles have been dying in increasing numbers, accidentally caught up in longline fishing gear. In response, the National Marine Fisheries Service plans to suspend longline fishing. EDF is working hard on a solution to keep fishermen in business while ensuring the steady recovery of turtles and ailing Gulf fisheries.
Currently vessels deploy lines over seven miles long, baited with hundreds of hooks. Our plan is to finance a conversion to fishing gear that does not harm sea turtles.
"We are working closely with both fishermen and regulators," says Heather Paffe, director of EDF's Gulf of Mexico Oceans program. "A small investment will go a long way towards protecting endangered sea life and keeping our coastal businesses viable."
Protective measures secured by EDF off the Texas coast have allowed Kemp's ridley turtles to rebound locally for a record fifth straight year.
Sea turtles and other marine life also will benefit from our campaign to switch troubled fisheries to "catch shares." Under
EDF enlisted fishermen to help save loggerheads. 12 Environmental Defense Fund Solutions

this system, each boat is assigned a percentage of the total allowable catch. Captains can fish sensibly rather than racing to catch fish as quickly as possible. This translates into increased dockside prices while reducing sea turtle entanglements and the inadvertent catching of other fish. Regulators recently approved a catch share for grouper and tilefish in the Gulf.
Paffe is optimistic. "Experience has shown us that environmental solutions are most successful when they make economic sense," she says.

ONLINE: Bringing back endangered sea turtles. Watch our video at edf.org/gulf

Our partnership with KKR: the bottom line is green

"Pollution by definition is

waste, and waste costs

money," says Gwen Ruta, our

VP of corporate partnerships.

Helping companies cut costs

through environmental inno-

vation is the driving force be-

hind our successful Green

Portfolio Project with private

equity giant Kohlberg Kravis

Roberts (KKR).

It's the first attempt by a

nonprofit group to green the

portfolio of a private equity

Busy round-the-clock, KKR's hospitals have ample

firm, prompting Fortune mag- opportunities to cut energy use.

azine to call the partnership

"significant" and "surprising." KKR has

other KKR companies: Accellent, Bio

ownership stakes in 47 companies, includ- met, Dollar General and Hospital Cor-

ing popular names like Toys "R" Us and poration of America.

Sealy.

EDF accepts no funding from KKR

We began by working with three KKR or any other corporate partner. We will

companies: U.S. Foodservice, PRIMEDIA make the Green Portfolio Project strate-

and Sealy Corporation. All told, we helped

gies freely available to other companies

initiate improvements that saved $16.4 mil- through our online Innovation Exchange

lion, cut paper use by 3,000 tons and reduced (see story page 5).

greenhouse gas pollution by more than 25,000

According to KKR managing director

tons. "These initial results provide a high note Ken Mehlman, "Going forward, we will

in this low economy," said Ruta, "and we're continue to implement Project tools to gen-

just getting started."

erate more cost savings and environmental

The initiative now spreads to four benefits at other portfolio companies."

Norbert Wu/Minden Pictures istockphoto.com

NEWS FROM THE FIELD

istockphoto.com istockphoto.com

Map your global warming future

U.S. greenhouse

gas emissions are

currently three

times those of

India. Ever wonder

if that rapidly de-

veloping country's

emissions will sur-

pass those of the

United States?

Now the answer is

at your fingertips.

EDF’s newinteractive globalmap compares twopaths forward on global warming: one accordingto business as usual and the secondincorporating our proposed reductions—a 50% cut in global emissions by2050. That’s the minimum reduction scientistssay is necessary to avert serious climatechange.The data take into account differentreduction targets for developed and developingnations, as is likely under any international climate agreement. By slidingthe scale on the map to a desiredyear—and highlighting a region by holdingthe mouse over it—users can comparefuture emissions.“The map allows you to see the implicationsof policy choices,” says ourGIS specialist Peter Black. “What actionswill get us where we need to be tosave the planet?”

Getting the lead out
Each year, some 400,000 newborns are exposed to dangerous levels of lead.
Lead is a potent neurotoxin, but not until recently were the serious health risks of very low levels of lead established. New studies show that lead levels even lower than EPA's 1978 allowable maximum caused lowered IQ's in children, aggressive behavior in teenagers and car-

diovascular disease in adults. Hence we welcome EPA's deci-
sion to tighten the lead standard tenfold. The new standard, 0.15 micrograms per cubic meter (g/m3), is within the range recommended to EPA by its science advisors. But EPA's own analysis shows that to prevent a measurable decrease in IQ for the most vulnerable children, the lead standard should be set as low as 0.02 g/m3.
EDF has worked to reduce lead exposure since the 1970s, when children's average blood level was seven times higher than today. In 1985, we played a major role in banning lead from gasoline.
"This will help protect children," says John Balbus, M.D., director of our Health program. "But the science justifies an even lower standard."

Air quality in national parks: Persistence pays off
For park visitors, seeing is believing.
The road toward clean air in America's national parks has been a long one. As far back as 1977, Congress set a goal of cleaning up dirty air in major parks and wilderness areas. But this proved more difficult than expected. After years of delays, 37 states still have not produced the plans required to clear the air near national parks.
EDF, Earthjustice and the National Parks Conservation Association successfully sued EPA to compel action. Now the states have two years to get their plans finished and approved.
The stakes are huge. Nitrogen oxides and sulfur dioxide from automobiles, power plants and cement manufacturers stunt plant growth, acidify lakes and worsen smog. They also contribute to haze that reduces visibility in Yellowstone, Yosemite and the Great Smoky Mountains to half or less of what it should be.
"With this victory and a newly energized EPA, we're finally on track to restore clean air to America's national parks," said our attorney Kevin Lynch.
Find latest updates at edf.org 13

On the move
CAN WILDLIFE ADAPT TO A WARMING WORLD?

Momtuik-Eastcott/NGS

Scientists are striving to predict how migration will change with global warming and what actions can help wildlife adapt.

You'd be hard-pressed to find two birds more unlike than the golden-cheeked warbler--delicate, private, tiny, and the greater sage-grouse--bulky, ground-dwelling and famously flamboyant in courtship. But for all their differences, the two species face an increasingly common problem: an uncertain future as global warming begins to play havoc with their habitats.

the Ashe-juniper habitat in central Texas. "Part of the coming challenge will be
anticipating the warbler's response to climate change," says Environmental Defense Fund ecologist David Wolfe, who works on habitat in Texas. "We have to protect land not just where they are now but where they will be."

A recent Audubon study revealed that more than 300 species of North American birds already are wintering farther north, some hundreds of miles from their former range. This will create varied and unpredictable

challenges. For the sage grouse, climate change could mean a big squeeze as sagebrush habitat is lost in many areas. The warbler's troubles are even trickier, since the species breeds in only one place in the world,

A RECIPE FOR WILDLIFE
Broadening a species' range greatly increases its resilience in times of stress, so Wolfe is working on buffer zones and corridors that will allow for the bird's next moves. Most of this potential habitat is on private land, and local landowners have embraced Wolfe's efforts.
"Ranchers might have once looked at having an endangered species as a liability, but we look at it as an asset," says one of those landowners, Jay Wagley, a cattle rancher who leases out land to hunters. "Habitat that's good for warblers is habitat that's good for most species."
A thousand miles to the north, this thought is echoed by Margaret Solen Hinson, an Idaho sheep and cattle rancher whose land serves as a gathering spot for courtship rituals of the sage grouse.
"Private lands are the connective tissue for migrating species," she says.
That connective tissue has never been more vital. Habitat preservation, never easy, has become even more difficult with habitat a moving target.
"One of the most complicated issues we face today is how to adapt to climate change," says EDF chief scientist Dr. Ste-

ven Hamburg. "We need to create policies that help species survive and make ecosystems more resilient--not just by capping pollution but by removing other stressors."
The new circumstances require a more active style of habitat management. It will no longer be enough to look back at an area's historic flora and fauna, but to anticipate, through modeling, what will be there next. EDF's Sam Pearsall, who works with estuarine ecosystems in North Carolina's Albemarle Sound, calls this pre-storing habitat, in his case readying freshwater habitats for their brackish future.
"We need to consider that rising seas may transform a terrestrial habitat into a submerged one," he says. "We must actively manage species and habitats or risk losing them."
Another protective approach is to bolster existing populations of endangered species, since a healthy and diverse population is more likely to withstand the effects of climate change.
THE MARMOT'S SALAD BAR
Keeping populations healthy is complicated by the fact that phenology--nature's clock-- is being thrown out of whack. Consider the marmot. For millions of years marmots would crawl out of their dark winter dens to nibble on the green world outside. Their timing was exquisite, their internal clocks prodded by the warmth of spring.

Endangered Species Act: Science wins

The greater sage-grouse celebrates.

President Obama has restored a key Endangered Species Act provision undone by the Bush administration. The decision reestablishes scientific oversight of federal agencies to protect rare species. EDF wildlife chairman Michael Bean, a leader in safeguarding endangered species law, was present at the announcement.
"The president's action is another indication that science is once again respected in the White House," said Bean. "The Endangered Species Act, like many of the plants and animals it protects, is on its way to recovery."

Animals Animals

"The salad bar was open," says An- owners and doing what we can to diversify

thony Barnosky, a paleoecologist and author of the forthcoming Heatstroke: Nature existing populations. At the same time, we

must improve our ability to predict where

in the Age of Global


“Private lands are the connectivetissue for migrating species,” she says.That connective tissue has neverbeen more vital. Habitat preservation,never easy, has become even more difficultwith habitat a moving target.“One of the most complicated issueswe face today is how to adapt to climatechange,” says EDF chief scientist Dr. Steven Hamburg. “We need to create policiesthat help species survive and make ecosystemsmore resilient—not just by cappingpollution but by removing other stressors.”The new circumstances require amore active style of habitat management. Itwill no longer be enough to look back at anarea’s historic flora and fauna, but to anticipate,through modeling, what will be therenext. EDF’s Sam Pearsall, who works withestuarine ecosystems in North Carolina’sAlbemarle Sound, calls this pre-storinghabitat, in his case readying freshwater habitatsfor their brackish future.“We need to consider that rising seasmay transform a terrestrial habitat into a submergedone,” he says. “We must actively managespecies and habitats or risk losing them.”Another protective approach is tobolster existing populations of endangeredspecies, since a healthy and diverse populationis more likely to withstand the effectsof climate change. 

THE MARMOT’S SALAD BARKeeping populations healthy is complicatedby the fact that phenology—nature’s clock—is being thrown out of whack. Consider themarmot. For millions of years marmotswould crawl out of their dark winter dens tonibble on the green world outside. Theirtiming was exquisite, their internal clocksprodded by the warmth of spring. “The salad bar was open,” says AnthonyBarnosky, a paleoecologist and authorof the forthcomingHeatstroke: Naturein the Age of GlobalWarming. “But nowwith warmer wintersthey wake early andstumble out into a stillsnow-covered world.They starve.”Scientists helping nature cope with climatechange agree: This is a problem that wecreated and that we must help alleviate. Thiswill require sharpening all of the tools we arealready using—creating migratory corridorsand buffers by working with private land-owners and doing what we can to diversifyexisting populations. At the same time, wemust improve ourability to predict wherespecies and habitatswill be moving.This new anticipatoryscience, relyingon predictive modelsand our best scientificinstincts, will be vitalas we look to the future to save our planet’spast. The art of preserving nature will haveto become almost as adaptable as nature itself,as we, along with the golden-cheekedwarbler and greater sage-grouse, take a crashcourse in living in a changing world.

A world apart
IN THE CENTRAL PACIFIC, AN OCEAN TREASURE FINDS PROTECTION
Large predatory fish like these sharks rule at Kingman Reef, a place still largely untouched by humans.

In January, President George W. Bush announced the creation of three "marine monuments"--ocean areas off-limits to fishing and mining. All told, the tracts of Central Pacific ocean, dotted with coral reefs and ribbons of spectacular tropical islands, are nearly the size of California. Huge undersea mountains, bubbling hydrothermal vents and the ocean's deepest chasm, the Mariana Trench, remain mostly unexplored beneath the waves.
Environmental Defense Fund, together with the Marine Conservation Biology Institute, worked with the Bush administration to win strong safeguards for the new sanctuaries. We compiled findings from more than 200 leading scientists and built key political backing in support of the plan.
"These new marine monuments rank right up there with our nation's greatest national parks," said EDF executive director David Yarnold.
See more glorious ocean creatures in our slide show: edf.org/CoralWorldSlideshow

Sometimes called the Tinkerbell of seabirds, the fairy tern catches fish by swooping down and plucking them from the sea.

The protected areas contain some of Earth's most long-lived shallow-water corals. This giant coral lobe may be 500 years old.
From the Spanish bobo for stupid, this blue-footed
booby is said to be clumsy on land, its
least graceful environment.

