
WWF-UK's Environmental Report

Introduction We're tackling the most serious environmental challenges facing the planet, building a future where people and nature thrive together. In doing this work, our business has an impact on the

environment. We're dedicated to measuring this impact and

reducing it to a minimum. So we monitor our energy consumption,

-5.7% water use, waste, recycling, staff business travel and purchasing. WWF-UK has an environmental policy and an environmental management system to manage and

Our biggest impacts are from busi-
ness travel and energy use. This year we've reduced
these by 5.7%

reduce these impacts. We produce this report annually as part of our commitment to our environmental policy. It's reviewed by our internal audit team and endorsed by our management team and trustees prior to publication.
This report outlines our environmental performance from 1 July 2009 to 30 June 2010. To minimise the environmental and financial costs associated with printing, our Environmental Report is only available online.
If you have any comments about this report, or suggestions on how we could improve

our environmental reporting, please e-mail our environmental management team at

ems@wwf.org.uk.

Overview
WWF-UK operates out of five locations in the UK. More than 80% of our staff are based at our headquarters in Godalming, Surrey. In Scotland, our office is in Dunkeld. We also rent office space in Belfast, Cardiff and London.
The average number of WWF-UK employees, calculated on a full-time basis, during this reporting period was 288. In the previous year the figure was 3061.

ISO 14001 We first achieved accreditation to ISO 14001 in 2008, and were re-certified in June 2010. ISO 14001 is an internationally-recognised environmental standard. It requires organisations to demonstrate an ongoing commitment to reducing their environmental impact.

Overall Results
We made good improvements to our overall environmental performance this year. We cut our total emissions of carbon dioxide (CO2) from business travel and energy use by 37 tonnes, to 614 tonnes. That's a 5.7% reduction on last year's total.


Energy
We're committed to minimising our CO2 emissions from electricity and gas use. We met our target for reducing electricity use, but unfortunately not our target for gas use.
Electricity
During this reporting period, we switched off two of five air-conditioning units in the computer server rooms in our UK headquarters. On the remaining three air-conditioning units, we've turned up the thermostat from 18°C to 23°C. This reduces the amount of time they're needed to cool the room. We've also switched off two servers. It's all helped us make savings in our electricity consumption.
This year the electricity consumption from our UK headquarters and our Scotland and Northern Ireland offices was equivalent to 163 tonnes of CO2. This is a reduction of 5.8% on last year's figure of 173 tonnes. So we met our target to cut our electricity use by 5%. Our FY11 target is to reduce the carbon emissions from our electricity use by 5% from FY10 levels.


We included gas use from our Belfast office (3 tonnes of CO2) for the first time this year. This, combined with the failure of the boilers in our UK headquarters to function efficiently during the prolonged period of particularly low temperatures over the winter, led to our failure to meet our target ­ to return to our FY08 level of gas use.

Our total gas use from our UK headquarters and our offices in Scotland and Northern Ireland was equivalent to 105 tonnes of CO2. We've set the same reduction target again for FY11. By ensuring the boilers are in optimum working condition and the thermostats are adjusted depending on outside temperatures, we aim to cut our CO2 emissions from gas use to 76 tonnes or less.



Biomass
In June 2008, our Scotland office installed a wood-chip boiler. We burn FSC woodchip pellets produced by a local company to heat the office and provide hot water. During FY10, we burned 11 tonnes of wood pellets ­ the same amount as in the previous year. This is equivalent to 2 tonnes of CO2 emissions. Our target for FY11 is to keep to this level of wood pellet consumption, which avoids the use of gas in our office in Scotland.

This year we've updated our conversion factor to calculate CO2 emissions from burning wood-chip pellets. In August 2010, Defra published new guideline figures which state that burning 1 tonne of wood pellets produces 183.93kg CO2.


Water
We've cut water consumption at our head office this year. The installation of waterreducing devices in all cisterns at the end of last year has continued to cut water consumption in WCs by up to 33%. As a result, we met our target to reduce per capita use to our FY08 level. Our water use figures are based on quarterly billing, with actual readings being provided in August of each year. We've now changed our monitoring ­ from now on we'll take monthly meter readings to get a better understanding of our water consumption. Our target for FY11 is to keep to this level of water consumption.


tRAVEL
As an international organisation, it's important that we visit our overseas projects to monitor progress and provide leadership and advice. We attend international meetings to lobby, and to collaborate with our colleagues worldwide.
In 2003, we identified that business travel caused our greatest impact on the environment. So we set a target to cut our CO2 emissions from business travel by 25% over six years from the baseline year of FY04. We've managed to meet this target. We've done it by giving teams of staff carbon budgets for travel. We've actively promoted travel by rail rather than by air to European destinations. And we've provided web, audio and videoconferencing alternatives. Since the baseline year of FY04, we've reduced our business travel emissions by 34%.

*This year we've updated our conversion factor to calculate CO2 emissions from road and rail transport in line with latest Defra guidelines, published in October 2009. Had we stayed consistent with previous conversion factors, we'd have been able to report an even greater reduction in CO2.

Our business travel includes journeys by air, road and rail. Figure 5 shows the split between our emissions from these different forms of transport in FY10. Air travel remains the main source of our business travel emissions.

WWF One in Five Challenge This year we joined the One in Five Challenge, WWF's guided programme and award scheme that helps companies and government cut 20% of their business flights within five years. We set FY08 as our baseline year and within 12 months had met the target ­ achieving a 32% cut in flight numbers. More information about the Challenge can be found at wwf.org.uk/oneinfive Our target for FY11 is to maintain business travel emissions at FY10 levels. We're anticipating an increase in our business activity over the coming years, we're reviewing how we factor in business growth when setting future targets.
5

WWF-UK's Environmental Report

Web, Audio And Videoconferencing
In January 2010 we installed a new Polycom videoconferencing system. It uses highdefinition cameras and internet technology. We have a unit in our UK headquarters, Scotland, Northern Ireland and Wales, and we'll be installing a unit at our London office later this year.
We continue to use our web-based conferencing system, Webex, as well as audioconferencing, as alternatives to face-to-face meetings. Using these technologies helps us to reduce our CO2 emissions from travel. It also saves us significant costs from avoided travel and hotel expenses, and reduces the amount of time our staff spend travelling to meetings. Furthermore, it means our staff spend less time away from their families and friends, which improves the work-life balance of employees.

Our new wormery has helped us send 4% less
waste to landfill compared to last year

Waste And Recycling
Waste from our UK headquarters is reported in litres this year, as the contractors that remove our landfill and recycling have not supplied us with weight data. Table 2 shows that we reduced our waste going to landfill by 4%. However, we failed to meet our ambitious target of reducing by 20% the amount of waste we send to landfill. During FY11 we aim to reduce the volume of waste we send to landfill by 10% against FY10 figures.
In an effort to reduce the amount of waste we send to landfill, we've introduced compost caddies at all tea points at our UK headquarters and our Scottish office. These are emptied into wormery units on site or are composted.
We were able to reduce the amount of paper we sent for recycling, because we've reduced our paper purchasing.

Procurement
We have a number of purchasing policies and guidelines for printing, paper and timber products, and guidelines for organising WWF events to ensure our products and activities have a minimal impact on the environment.
We ask our new suppliers to complete an environmental and ethical questionnaire so we can assess their environmental performance. Products in our gift catalogue are evaluated using an extended environmental and ethical questionnaire, which enables us to get a clear understanding of the raw materials used, the manufacturing process and manufacturing location, and the packaging. In the course of the year, we reviewed and updated our environmental and ethical questionnaire. It now also considers how products can be reused or recycled.



Using a company to manage our
print materials and replacing paper towels
with Bio-dryers in our washrooms have meant
we've reduced the amount of paper we use
by 38% this year

Timber and paper products
We're committed to the responsible purchasing of forest products. Our intention is to source all the forest products that we purchase from well-managed forests that have been certified to credible certification standards, or that are 100% recycled.
The Global Forest & Trade Network is a partnership led by WWF. It links more than 360 companies in over 30 countries to improve the management of the world's production forests and create a new market for environmentallyresponsible forest products. Some 40 companies participate in the GFTN-UK. They work to identify and avoid timber and paper supplies that come from unknown or unacceptable sources, and move instead towards products from credibly-certified forests.
WWF-UK follows the membership requirements of the GFTN-UK. We report by calendar year the type and weight of timber and paper products we purchase. Products which cannot be traced to their source or are identified or suspected as not being accepted by the responsible purchasing policy are referred to as Category 1. Last year we set a target to reduce our consumption of timber and paper products in 2009, and to eliminate Category 1 products. The figures in Table 4 show that we purchased a small amount of Category 1 products during 2009. It's our continued intention to eliminate Category 1 products.
During 2008, we started to use a print management company to manage our printing output effectively, to ensure compliance with our paper and printing policies, and to reduce printing costs. This move has helped us to reduce our consumption of timber and paper products by 38%.

5 years
For the fifth year running, we've offset
our unavoidable emissions by investing
in gold standard carbon offset schemes

Carbon Offsets
This report outlines our energy use and consumption, as well as the ways in which we strive to reduce our carbon emissions to the irreducible minimum. We believe it's important to take all these measures to reduce our emissions before resorting to offsetting carbon.
This is the fifth year that WWF-UK has offset carbon emissions from our electricity and gas use and from our road, rail and air travel. We've purchased Gold Standard offsets from Climatefriendly, the WWF network's chosen supplier for offsetting. This year, our funds will be used to support a landfill gas recovery project in Jiangshu Province, China.
Regular

Why we are here To stop the degradation of the planet's natural environment and to build a future in which humans live in harmony with nature. wwf.org.uk
WWF-UK, registered charity number 1081247 and registered in Scotland number SC039593. A company limited by guarantee number 4016725 © 1986 panda symbol and ® "WWF" Registered Trademark of WWF-World Wide Fund For Nature (formerly World Wildlife Fund), WWF-UK Panda House, WeysidePark, Godalming, Surrey GU7 1XR, t: +44 (0)1483 426333, e: ems@wwf.org.uk, wwf.org.uk

