 National, Friday, September 11, 2009 422 mots, p. A 13

Nations Remain Divided on Global Warming Policy, U.S. Negotiator Says
By JOHN M. BRODER

WASHINGTON - The Obama administration's senior negotiator on global warming warned Thursday that developed and developing nations remained deeply divided in talks on reducing greenhouse gases and that time was running out before United Nations treaty negotiations in December.

The negotiator, Todd Stern, the State Department special envoy on the issue, told a Congressional panel that it was critical that Congress act on proposed energy and global warming legislation to demonstrate the nation's willingness to play its part in reducing harmful emissions.

"Let me say bluntly that the tenor of negotiations in the formal U.N. track has been difficult," Mr. Stern told the House Select Committee for Energy Independence and Global Warming. "Developing countries tend to see a problem not of their own making that they are being asked to fix in ways which, they fear, could stifle their ability to lift their standards of living."

"Developed countries," he said, "tend to see an unforgiving problem with potentially grave and irreversible consequences and that cannot be solved without the full participation of developing countries, particularly China and the other emerging market economies."

Mr. Stern said China, India, Brazil and other rapidly industrializing countries were taking significant unilateral steps to slow the growth of emissions of carbon dioxide and other gases that contribute to the warming of the planet. He said their efforts in some cases outstripped those of the United States and some other advanced economies.

Still, officials from those countries are wary of any treaty that binds them to enforceable targets, believing that such measures could permanently condemn them to second-class economic status.

"I have said on occasion that countries like these are often willing to do more than they are willing to agree to do," Mr. Stern said. "But we can't get an international deal done unless they are willing to agree in an international context."

He said the United States could also pose a major hurdle to the global talks to produce a treaty to succeed the Kyoto Protocol, a 1997 accord that expires in 2012.

While the House approved a fairly aggressive climate and energy bill in June, action in the Senate this fall is uncertain at best.

"It is critical that the Senate now do its part to move this process forward in a timely manner," Mr. Stern said. "Nothing the United States can do is more important for the international negotiation process than passing robust, comprehensive clean energy legislation as soon as possible."

Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts and the chairman of the select committee, is a co-sponsor of the House climate bill. Mr. Markey said that House passage of the bill had helped prompt the Group of 8 leading industrialized nations to agree to try to limit the global rise in temperature to 2 degrees Celsius (3.6 degrees Fahrenheit) and that Senate action could help spur agreement at the December treaty talks in Denmark.

"With a few months left before climate negotiations in Copenhagen," Mr. Markey said, "it's now time for the Senate to act and pass a bill so America will have the stature to craft a global climate agreement."
