

Financial Times
Features, Saturday, February 20, 2021 2726 mots, p. 1,2

Life and Arts

Bill Gates: My green manifesto
Many of us feel powerless in the face of the climate crisis. Here the billionaire philanthropist
and Microsoft co-founder offers four bold ideas to help business take on the challenge Bill
Gates: My green manifesto

In the conversations I have about climate change, one question comes up more than any other: "How can I
help?"

Sometimes it's an individual who simply wants to know whether to stop buying plastic straws. (Answer: it
doesn't do much for climate change, but it helps the environment in other ways.) Just as often, though, the
question comes from someone working on a larger scale ? for example, a chief executive who wants to know:
"What can my company do that will really make a difference?"

Unfortunately, even the most dedicated climate change advocates have struggled to ﬁnd satisfying answers
to that question. But there are in fact things businesses can do to make a measurable difference for the
climate. They will not come easily, though. Avoiding a climate disaster requires a different way of doing
business, the courage to take on risks that many CEOs are not used to taking ? and that investors are not
used to rewarding.

It   took   me   years   to   come   to   this   point   of   view.   I   became   interested   in   climate change   not   as   an
environmentalist, but as an advocate for global health and development. Since the early 2000s, my wife
Melinda and I have been funding efforts to improve health and ﬁght poverty in lower- and middle-income
countries. A few times a year, I would travel abroad for the chance to see the work in action. Often, I'd ﬂy into
a country at night and be struck by the immensity of the darkness. A billion people, I learnt, did not have
access to reliable electricity. Around half of them lived in sub- Saharan Africa. (Today the global number is
about 860m people.)

It became obvious that it would be virtually impossible to make real inroads on disease and poverty when
more than one in 10 people on Earth did not have reliable access to all the beneﬁts of energy ? lights for
schools and health clinics, transport between work and home, fertiliser for crops, even air-conditioning to
withstand rising temperatures.

But achieving a modern lifestyle depends on fossil fuels. And the problem is simple: we can't afford to release
more greenhouse gases. In fact, we need to stop releasing them altogether, and do it by 2050. Think of the
climate like a bathtub that's slowly ﬁlling up with water. Even if we slow the ﬂow of water to a trickle, the tub
will eventually ﬁll up and water will spill all over the ﬂoor. To stop temperatures rising and avoid disaster, we
have to turn off the tap entirely ? we have to get to zero greenhouse gas emissions.

I wrote my new book to propose a practical plan for eliminating emissions and developing and deploying the
tools we need to so. While I'm optimistic that we can do that, it's going to take a lot of effort from the only
groups capable of operating at a global scale ? governments, non-proﬁts and businesses.

How hard will it be? In the course of writin'How to Avoid a Climate Disaster, I developed away to answer that
question.   I   call   it   Green   Premiums   ?   the   differences   in   cost   between   a   fossil-fuelbased   way   of   doing
something and the clean, non-emitting way of doing the same thing.

Green Premiums tell us how much it will cost to zero-out emissions in all the sectors of the economy where
fossil fuels are involved ? including producing electricity, manufacturing, agriculture, transportation, and
heating and cooling. Armed with these Green Premiums, we can see which zero-carbon tools are practical
now, and which ones we still need to improve or invent.

In my research, I found some pleasant surprises. For example, in the US, switching to a clean electricity grid
using current technology (wind, solar, hydropower and nuclear) would raise electricity prices by about 15 per
cent over current retail rates. That's a relatively small hike for many people ? roughly $18 a month ? though
we'd need to make sure that lower-income families wouldn't be burdened by it. Europe, with its abundant

 





sources of renewables, is in a similar position.


Unfortunately, many countries don't have as much wind and sunlight as the US and Europe do. In those
places, the Green Premiums on electricity will be quite a bit higher, and they'll need innovation to close the
gap. In fact, the relatively low Green Premiums for electricity in the US and Europe are the except- ion, not
the rule. For a large majority of activities that cause emissions ? everything from making cement and steel to
ﬂying jetliners ? we don't have clean options that are remotely as cheap as their conventional counterparts.

For example, cargo ships run on a fuel that costs about $1.29 per gallon in the US. The clean versions of this
fuel cost from $5.50 to $9.05 per gallon, depending on how they're made ? an increase of 300 to 600 per
cent. No shipping line is going to voluntarily increase its fuel costs by such a huge margin.

Why are most of the Green Premiums so high? Because green products face stiff competition from their
polluting counterparts. Fossil fuels are readily building the infrastructure to extract, process and move them
around the world. In addition, their prices don't reﬂect the damage they do to people or the environment.
And they do their job very effectively ? a single litre of petrol contains as much energy as 34 sticks of
dynamite. Virtually all the clean alternatives are less powerful.

This is why we need energy innov- ation. Clean tech has to be so cheap that everyone adopts it.

It   is   hard   to   overstate   the   magnitude   of   this   challenge.   Energy   is   a   $5tn-a-year   business,   and   it   is   not
accustomed to rapid change. It will take time to achieve the scale of change we need, so we should get to
work now on creating the policies, technologies and market structures that will make it possible.

The good news is that there is growing interest among the groups best suited to drive this change ?
corporations and governments. The bad news is that right now we don't have the economic structures to
allow them to have an impact, and so they often do things that may look good on paper but don't actually
help solve the problem.

Planting trees, for instance. It sounds like a simple ﬁx and it has obvious appeal for all of us who love trees ?
but its impact on climate change is overblown. Although trees absorb some carbon, they can never take in
enough   to   offset   the   damage   from   our   modern   lifestyle.   To   absorb   the   lifetime   emissions   that   will   be
produced by every American alive today ? just 4 per cent of the global population ? you'd need to plant and
permanently maintain trees on more than 16bn acres, roughly half the landmass of the world.

Yet if you're a business leader looking to do something about climate change, planting trees looks like an
attractive Continued on page 2

Continued from page 1 option. That's not a failure on your part ? it just means the world hasn't given you a
way to do something that has more impact.

So what can you do that will have impact? There are four areas where companies can make a practical
difference. Not all of them will apply to every business, but there is something on this list for most of them.

The ﬁrst area involves mobilising capital to reduce the Green Premiums. For some products ? like wind, solar
and electric cars ? the Green Premiums are already low, but will go down even further if more companies
buy them. In other cases, such as low-carbon steel and fuels for shipping and aviation, the Green Premiums
are prohibitively high. These are the sectors where we need to invest the most money and effort.

In practice, this means companies need to be willing to ﬁnance innovative low-carbon solutions where the
Green Premiums are highest. Investors, for instance, can lower the cost of capital for these technologies and
make ﬁnancing easier for them as they get to large-scale demonstration projects.

In some cases, investors may need to accept lower returns too. This is inherently risky ? I've already lost more
money on battery companies than I ever thought I would. But pooling resources and investing together
instead of individually will lower the risk for any single investor. By providing low-cost capital and other
ﬁnancial   concessions   along   multiple   stages   of   a   technology's   deve-   lopment,   you   can   help   promising
innovators navigate the obstacles that keep them from getting their ideas out of the lab and into the market.
You can also mentor clean energy entrepreneurs, sponsor pilot projects and put money into innovative funds
that prioritise climate impact.

The second way your company can have an impact is through the products it buys. If your company runs a
ﬂeet of vans, for example, you can commit to buying electric vehicles. You'll not only meaningfully reduce
your company's emissions, you'll also send a signal to auto manufacturers that there's a growing market for

 





electric vehicles, which will in turn drive competition and push prices down. Procurement is a powerful tool
to start building markets for other products too, such as hydrogen fuels and greener alternatives to steel and
cement.


Another example of using procurement to drive down Green Premiums involves the airline industry. Your
company can offset the emissions from employees' travel by buying sustainable aviation fuel for the miles
they ﬂy. That creates demand for clean fuels, attracting more innovation in that area, and it makes travel-
related emissions a factor in your company's business decisions. Microsoft and Alaska Airlines signed a deal
like this for certain routes last year. Other businesses are putting a price on the carbon emitted by all their
divisions, forcing each team to consider its emissions. Swiss Re recently imposed a cost of $100 per tonne
emitted by each of its divisions.

There are many other examples of companies making a measurable difference by paying for early-stage
techno- logies that reduce or offset emissions. Some, including Stripe, are supporting carbon capture, a
promising technology that needs investment to scale up. Through the Hybrit project, some steel companies
are   integrating   clean   hydrogen   into   their   production   methods.   And   utility   companies   are   buying   long-
duration storage solutions for clean electricity, as Great River Energy recently did with Form Energy.

The   third  area   is  expanding   research  and  development.   Consider   Impossible   Foods,   one   of  the   leading
producers of plant-based meat, in which I was an early investor. (Cattle are a major producer of methane, a
greenhouse gas.) In 2020, Impossible announced plans to double the size of its R&D team with a goal of
reducing the price of its burgers and expanding market share. Last March, its products were available in just
150 grocery stores. Today they're available in more than 15,000.

The ﬁnal way you can help drive down the Green Premiums is to help shape public policies. You can make it
clear that governments need to invest in public R&D for clean energy, and call on ofﬁcials to give the private
sector incentives to innovate in this area and to help clean energy compete by putting a price on carbon or
setting minimum requirements for the use of clean energy.

Working in these four areas will not always be comfortable. If your bank loans money to a company that goes
under, your bottom line will take a hit. If you assign your best researchers to a clean-energy project, they
might end up going down a dead end. Time spent talking to a politician about climate policy is time you
could spend discussing your core business instead.

But these are the short-term costs required of every business leader who wants to do more than pay lip-
service to climate change. It takes courage for CEOs to bear these costs ? and patience for board members
and investors to reward them for it. Yet in the long run, these risky steps will be good for business. The Green
Premiums will come down, and consumers will remember which companies were serious about helping
avoid a climate disaster. Of course, governments have to play an essential role too. Like the business leaders
who are taking this seriously, policymakers need to factor climate change into many of the decisions they
make. For example, they need to dramatically increase funding for clean energy research and development ?
in the US, a ﬁvefold increase would put energy on par with federal health research. That level of funding
would demonstrate that governments are committed to solving the toughest climate problems.

They   should   also   use   their   procurement   power   to   drive   up   demand   for   lowand   zero-carbon   products.
Governments   buy   huge   numbers   of   products,   from   ofﬁce   supplies   to   airplanes,   and   are   especially   big
customers   in   many   of   the   sectors   that   are   hardest   to   decarbonise,   such   as   cement   and   steel.   Major
commitments to buy green will send a clear market signal that there's demand for these products.

Governments should also eliminate unproductive policies that prevent new technologies from emerging.
And   they   should   level   the   playing   ﬁeld   for   clean   technology   by   adopting   policies   such   as   clean   fuel
standards, expanding tax credits for the technologies we need to develop, and raising the cost of emitting
greenhouse gases through a price on carbon.

Finally, those of us who can make big individual commitments also have a responsibility to step up. As
someone who has a large carbon footprint, I wanted to ﬁnd the most effective way to address my family's
emissions. I'm buying enough clean aviation fuel to offset emissions from any ﬂights my family and I may
take. I'm also buying offsets through a direct air-capture company and supporting a non-proﬁt that installs
clean-energy upgrades in low-income housing in Chicago.

Although I think this approach is effective, it's far too expensive to be scalable. (Most offset programmes cost
about $10 for each ton of carbon averted. I'm paying about $400 per ton.) We need programmes that allow
lots of people to contribute ? which will drive down the per-ton cost ? and direct their resources toward

 





funding the breakthroughs that will have the most impact. I'm working with partners on creating such a
programme.


In my experience, it's rare to have a cause in which the entire world wants to participate. I'm used to working
in global health, where rich-world governments and companies occasionally need to be reminded why they
should care.

Not so with climate change. People around the world from all walks of life want to do something meaningful
about it. Now, after years of uncertainty, we are ﬁnally seeing what meaningful action looks like for business
leaders. It is having the courage to take risks.

Bill Gates is the co-founder of Microsoft and co-chairman of the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation. His book
'How to Avoid a Climate Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We Need' is published by
Penguin

Investing in innovative tech is inherently risky ? I've lost more money on battery companies than I ever
thought I would Consumers will remember which companies were serious about helping avoid a climate
disaster The arc of energy history, 1840-present Share of global energy supply (%) 50 Coal 40 Oil 30 Natural
gas 20 10 Modern renewables 0 1840-1900 60 0 1910-1970 60 0 1930-1990 60 0 2015 60 Source: Vaclav Simil,
'Energy Transitions' Government support for energy innovation Global public expenditure on energy
technology R&D* ($bn) 20 Cross-cutting, unallocated, other Peak in 2009 was due to post 2007-08 ﬁnancial
crisis stimulus funding Electricity and storage 15 Hydrogen fuel cells and CCUS Nuclear 10 Renewable energy
5 Energy efﬁciency Fossil fuels 0 1977 1980 1990 2000 2010 2019 Source: IEA * Includes spending on
demonstration projects





 


