

The New York Times (web site)
Thursday, March 18, 2021 -  1060 mots

Chuck Schumer Stalls Climate Overhaul of Flood Insurance
Program

By Christopher Flavelle and Emily Cochrane

The Senate leader is objecting to a plan that would raise costs for some of his constituents by bringing ﬂood
insurance rates in line with climate risks.

WASHINGTON — One of the federal government’s main efforts to push Americans to prepare for climate
threats is in question after the Senate majority leader’s ofﬁce objected to a plan to adjust ﬂood insurance
rates.

The   Federal   Emergency   Management   Agency   was   preparing   to   announce   new   rates   for   federal   ﬂood
insurance on April 1, so that the prices people pay would more accurately reﬂect the risks they face. The
change would very likely help reduce Americans’ vulnerability to ﬂoods and hurricanes by discouraging
construction in high-risk areas. But it would also increase insurance costs for some households, making it a
tough sell politically.

Last week, the ofﬁce of Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic majority leader, pushed back
on the changes, according to several people familiar with the discussion. That pushback has caused FEMA to
pause the rollout of the new rates.

Senator Schumer objected to the ﬂood-insurance overhaul when it was ﬁrst announced in 2019, citing its
potential to raise costs for people on Long Island. The new system would mean steeper rates for some high-
value homes, and the southern shore of Long Island includes the Hamptons, which have some of the most
expensive real estate in the country.

Senator Schumer’s ofﬁce told FEMA that the new rates could have a “severe impact” on some communities
in New York, according to a person familiar with the conversation. The person said that the senator’s ofﬁce
had asked FEMA to reconsider going forward with the plan and asked the agency for a follow-up meeting,
which, as of Wednesday, had not been scheduled.

“FEMA shouldn’t be rushing to overhaul their process and risk dramatically increasing premiums on middle-
class and working-class families without ﬁrst consulting with Congress and the communities at greatest risk
to the effects of climate change,” Alex Nguyen, a spokesman for Senator Schumer, said in a statement.
“Congress and the Biden administration must work together in a collaborative and transparent process” for
what he called “affordable protection” in communities nationwide including Brooklyn and Queens.

In a statement, a FEMA spokesperson, who asked not to be identiﬁed, said the agency would continue to
work with Congress to implement the plan, saying the changes would make insurance rates “better reﬂect
an individual property’s unique ﬂood risk.”

The objections from Senator Schumer’s ofﬁce create a political dilemma for the Biden administration, which
has committed to address climate change. Unlike rejoining the Paris Agreement or banning drilling on
public lands, moves that have broad Democratic support, increasing the cost of ﬂood insurance is unlikely to
generate a positive response from voters.

But ﬂood insurance is one of the most powerful tools the federal government has to limit the damage done
by climate change, by inﬂuencing how and where Americans build homes. And even if the administration
succeeds at reducing United States greenhouse gas emissions, the buildup of those gases already in the
atmosphere means that ﬂoods and hurricanes will continue to worsen for the foreseeable future.

That means the government must focus on warning homeowners about the ﬂooding threat, according to
climate and disaster experts. That encourages people to take steps to reduce their exposure, like elevating
their homes or moving.



“Premiums should be based on risk, so people can have accurate signals about the nature of the hazards

 



they face,” said Chad Berginnis, executive director of the Association of State Floodplain Managers. “I really
hope Congress is able to engage constructively here.”


Under the new approach, 23 percent of households with ﬂood insurance would see their rates fall right away,
by an average of $86 a month, according to data provided by FEMA, because the updated formula shows
they have been overpaying based on their risk. Another 73 percent would see either no change or an
increase of no more than $20 a month.

But for some of the remaining households, costs would go up signiﬁcantly, according to others briefed on
the changes.

Congress prevents FEMA from increasing a household’s ﬂood insurance premiums by more than 18 percent
a year. Under the new system, some households would face that maximum annual increase for 10 years or
more. As a result, their rates could increase at least ﬁvefold over that time.

Those big rate increases would mostly apply to higher-cost homes, which under the current formula tend to
underpay for insurance. Many of the people that would see a decrease live in lower-cost homes.

The   pushback   from   Senator   Schumer   is   important   because,   as   Senate   leader,   he   can   exert   signiﬁcant
inﬂuence over FEMA. He controls the Senate ﬂoor, so he holds sway over the timing of critical conﬁrmation
votes — including Deanne Criswell, the Biden administration’s nominee for FEMA administrator — and other
senior roles.

FEMA also depends, like every agency, on congressional approval for its annual funding and must persuade
Senate leaders to support any requests for additional money or authority for new programs — for example, to
better respond to disasters or prepare for the effects of climate change. For reasons like these, the agency’s
relationship with the Senate leadership is particularly important.

The dispute is only the latest delay for the overhaul.

When FEMA announced the change, in 2019, the new rates were supposed to take effect in October 2020.
But the Trump administration pushed back the new rates until this year, worried in part that increasing
premiums shortly before the election would hurt President Donald J. Trump politically, according to a person
familiar with the discussions.

But opposition also came from Congress, including from Senator Schumer.

After FEMA ﬁrst said it would overhaul rates to reﬂect the full ﬂood risk homeowners faced, Senator Schumer
held a news conference criticizing the plan.

“How can we ram through a national ﬂood insurance plan that could unfairly put a bull’s-eye on the backs of
Long Island and New York homeowners without more consultation?” Senator Schumer said at the time,
citing the potential effects on property values. The Long Island coastline is home to everything from modest
bungalows and suburban communities to multimillion-dollar waterfront estates.

Senator Schumer’s message for FEMA, he said then, was simple: “Halt. Stop. Stop this plan.”


 


