 News, Monday, February 10, 2020 442 mots, p. 2

FT Fm

ABP targets climate neutral portfolio by 2050

GLOBAL WARMING Dutch pension fund plans deeper cuts to coal-related holdings

CHRIS FLOOD ABP, the largest Dutch pension fund, is to cut its exposure to coal miners and companies that produce oil from tar sands as part of ambitious plans to protect its €456bn investment portfolio from the threats posed by global warming.

The measures, which include a commitment to ensure that its portfolio is climate neutral by 2050, will be closely scrutinised by many other pensions funds as institutional investors face pressure to strengthen their sustainable investments. Pension funds in the Netherlands and Nordics have taken the lead globally in the fight against climate change, acting as the advanced guard for big investors worldwide in pressing companies to adopt higher environmental, social and governance standards.

"ABP wants to offer all our participanSts a good pension now and in the future — one they can enjoy in a liveable world," said Corien Wortmann, chairwoman of the fund that looks after 2.9m government and education employees and retirees.

ABP plans to achieve a 40 per cent reduction in carbon emissions from its equity portfolio during the next five years compared with 2015 levels.

It will phase out its s investments in companies where coal mining accounts for 30 per cent of annual turnover and also in companies where oil production from tar sands accounts for more than 20 per cent of annual turnover by 2025.

Some progress towards meeting these targets has already been achieved as part of a previous scheme to reduce the carbon footprint of APB's holdings of listed equities by a quarter by the end of 2020. ABP said it had already reached a 30 per cent reduction in the carbon emissions of its listed shares.

It also intends to commit €15bn by 2025 to sustainable and affordable energy projects, including green bonds, and to ensure that a fifth of its total assets are invested in line with the UN's Sustainable Development Goals. About 14 per cent of ABP's assets are already devoted to meeting the SDGs. Meeting the new target would raise the investment from €64bn currently to about €100bn.

Ms Wortmann said that ABP planned to establish new criteria by 2025 to help it assess whether companies were making efficient and sustainable use of natural resources while also respecting human rights.

"We want it to be common practice for companies to have efficient and socially responsible natural resource supply chains," said Ms Wortmann.

The vast majority of institutional investors have so far shied away from selling out of companies that fail to meet ESG standards in favour of engagement with management.
