 News, Monday, October 26, 2020 514 mots, p. 10

BlackRock and Vanguard in climate storm

Financials'A lot of them will say "we will vote for someone's else's resolution", but why aren't they filing their own'Hohn calls for big asset managers to challenge groups on global warming
ATTRACTA MOONEY INVESTMENT CORRESPONDENT

Billionaire hedge fund manager Christopher Hohn has accused BlackRock and Vanguard of acting like sheep when it comes to climate change, arguing that large asset managers are taking "insufficient and ineffective action" on global warming.

Sir Christopher, through his charity The Children's Investment Fund Foundation, has written to seven of the world's biggest asset managers, calling on them to force companies around the world to set out transition plans towards a low-carbon world.

His letters are the latest example of the intense scrutiny facing the $89tn asset management industry over its role in tackling climate change. Many large fund managers, which have immense sway over the world's biggest businesses, have warned that global warming could hit investment returns. But Sir Christopher accused "most asset managers" of "total greenwash", arguing they were far too complacent about the risks of global warming.

"The asset management industry is a joke in respect to what they are actually doing [around climate change]," he said. "They talk but they don't actually do anything effective."

In the letters, Sir Christopher and CIFF chairman Graeme Sweeney said asset managers such as BlackRock should "show leadership", calling on them to file shareholder resolutions at annual meetings that ask companies to prepare transition plans to reduce their carbon emissions.

Sir Christopher's hedge fund, TCI, is already taking this approach, including at Spanish airport operator Aena, which this week agreed to back his demands for an annual shareholder vote on its climate plans.

However, only a handful of big asset managers have filed motions over climate change at annual meetings in recent years, despite the investment industry becoming increasingly outspoken about the risks of global warming. Coalitions of smaller investors have instead filed the majority of shareholder resolutions on climate change.

"Asset managers are sheep," Sir Christopher said. "A lot of them will say 'we will vote for someone's else's resolution', but why aren't they filing their own resolutions?" Mr Sweeney added: "The major breakthrough with Aena shows that this approach is possible. It is not difficult for leading investors to table such resolutions. They are choosing not to do so." The pair said the voting records of BlackRock, Vanguard, Capital Group, Fidelity Investments, Goldman Sachs Asset Management and State Street Global Investors on big climate resolutions were appalling. They added that JPMorgan Asset Management's voting record was weak. "Pension funds should fire asset managers that fail to use their voting rights to ensure companies produce credible transition plans for net zero [carbon emissions]," Sir Christopher said. "Pension consultants also need to wake up to this."

Vanguard said it "cares deeply about the long-term impact of climate change and we continue to engage with company leaders and boards on this important issue".

BlackRock has begun voting against directors over climate concerns and is reviewing its engagement priorities, which includes looking at how it votes on shareholder resolutions.
