 News, Friday, August 21, 2020 496 mots, p. 11

Get used to dramatic weather swings, experts warn

As strong wind and rain hit UK days after a heatwave, experts say climate change could make this the norm
By Jack Hardy

DRAMATIC swings between "extreme" weather events are to become more frequent as a result of global warming, forecasters warned yesterday as Storm Ellen unleashed 66mph winds. Britain has seen the weather lurch from a heatwave to heavy rain and flooding and high winds in the past two weeks - a pattern that is expected to appear less remarkable in future years.

Almost 194,000 homes and businesses in Ireland were hit by power cuts and roads were blocked by fallen trees when Storm Ellen arrived on Wednesday night.

Winds of up to 66mph were recorded in South Wales but Britain largely escaped the worst of Ellen's wrath. Today, however, the country is expected to be lashed by what the Met Office described as "unusually strong winds for August", potentially hitting speeds of 70mph in coastal areas.

A yellow alert for strong winds is in place for much of England and Wales, along with parts of Scotland, threatening to plunge transport routes into chaos and knock out power supplies.

It will be caused by another lowpressure system forming to the west of Ireland in Ellen's wake, leading to more windy weather over the next few days, particularly in Northern Ireland and western parts of the UK. The stormy conditions come just a week after scorching conditions when temperatures hit 34C for six consecutive days. Luke Miall, a forecaster at the Met Office, said Ellen will be felt "for the next couple of days" and is "not going to move through really quickly so we will continue to see a really big area of low pressure through the rest of this week".

He added: "We have gone from one extreme to the other, the first thing that springs to my mind with these sorts of events is climate change. We are likely to see these swings in extreme events more frequently. Although I couldn't necessarily say these two events were directly caused by climate change, it's likely that these sorts of swings in our weather will become more frequent."

Campers especially could experience a challenging few days.

"With this spell of unsettled weather coinciding with trees in full leaf and a peak in the camping season, windrelated impacts are more likely at lower wind speeds compared to other times of the year," the Met Office said. The unseasonably stormy weather has prompted warnings for motorists to ensure they are prepared.

Rod Dennis, a spokesman for RAC Breakdown, said: "This spell of autumnal feeling weather is going to make driving conditions very unpleasant for a lot of us over the next few days.

"Strong winds will mean journeys by road will take longer than usual, and could be affected by fallen branches. Add in some very intense rainfall and drivers will need to take real care to complete their trips safely."
