1  Key Asks for  Climate Justice and System Change  2  Roots and Impacts of Climate Change  As early as the 1970s, climate change impacts have already been raised as a scientific  concern and at present, it is dubbed as the greatest catastrophe of the 21st century.  Every year, climate change is contributing to the deaths of nearly 400,000 people  mostly from developing countries. Their deaths mainly caused by extreme weather  conditions, malnutrition, poverty and infectious diseases (Harvey, 2012).  Climate change is a long-term shift in the Earth’s climate conditions. Specifically, the  biggest factor in these changes is a steady increase in the average global temperature  level caused by the buildup of Green House Gases (GHG) in the atmosphere. This  increase in GHG is due to natural activities (such as volcanic activities, varying solar  output and the changing Earth’s orbit) and human activities (such as burning of fossil  fuels, land use change, and energy and industrial processes). Since the beginning of  the Industrial Revolution (around 1750), human impact on climate change greatly  exceeded that of the natural activities mainly from the burning of fossil fuels.  Greenhouse gas emissions have dramatically increased since the pre-industrial period  mainly by economic and population growth. Because of the needed expansion for  economic activities, in order to cater the needs and demands of the growing global  population, greater demand for energy and materials use is required. Hence, greater  GHG emissions from various industries are produced.  Global warming is already producing extreme weather patterns around the world.  According to a recent UN Office for Disaster Risk Reduction (UNISDR) review (2015),  87% of disasters in 2014 are climate-related. About 80% of the disasters in the last  decade (2000-2010) were due to the storms and flooding. In Russia, more than 55,000  people died from heat wave in 2010 (Goldenberg, 2014). In 2013, Typhoon “Haiyan”,  one of the strongest tropical cyclone ever recorded, devastated the Philippines and left  more than 6,000 people dead (CNN, 2013). Rising temperature in the Arctic region is  causing massive melting of sea ice and permafrost. Animals like polar bears and ringed  seals are already affected due to the loss of ice habitat and food (WWF, 2015a). If  humans do not curb their carbon emissions, the increasing threat of global warming  could wipe out one-fourth of all plants and animals into extinction within 100 years (US  EPA, 2014). The impact of the decrease in food production due to climate change is  already aggravating the hunger and malnutrition problem in the world. According to the  World Food Programme (WFP) (2015), the risk of hunger and malnutrition could  increase by 20% by year 2050 if the impact of climate change in the global food system  will not be lessened.  3  International Community’s Response  As early in the 1960s and 1970s, climatologists already noticed increasing carbon  dioxide concentrations in the atmosphere. Global temperature increase also raised  alarms with media and the public in the 1908s, and world leaders meeting for the 1992  United Nations Conference on Environment and Development (UNCED) in Rio de  Janeiro also known as the ¨Earth Summit¨ singled it out as an urgent issue that must be  addressed. Its main message focused on the need for states to recognize and redirect  their plans and policies to ensure that they would take into account any environmental  impact from their economic decisions (UN, 1997). Three important agreements were  adopted: the Rio Declaration on Environment and Development, Agenda 21 and the  Forest Principles. In addition, two important legally binding agreements were signed at  the Earth Summit, the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD) and the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC), this last with the aim of  stabilizing GHG concentrations “at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic  (human induced) interference with the climate system” (UNFCCC, 2014).  In 1997 the Kyoto Protocol (KP) was adopted under the UNFCCC as the first legally  binding tool that focused on the mitigation of greenhouse gases. Under the KP, 36  developed nations committed to reduce their emissions by 4% during the first  commitment period (CP1). The US, one of the biggest emitters of GHG in the world, has  never ratified the Kyoto Protocol. Three flexibility mechanisms were introduced to the  Protocol at the behest of industrialized countries led by the US: International Emissions  Trading, Joint Implementation and the Clean Development Mechanism. In 2014, official  data on the CP1 showed that the commitment of reductions was surpassed reducing  the emissions globally by 24 percent. However, this reduction was caused mainly by the  so-called and criticized ¨hot air¨, or the emission reductions that already occurred in  economies in transition before 1997. Furthermore, despite the low need of using flexible  mechanisms, developing countries actively used all of them to accomplish their  commitments (Climate Report N° 44, May 2014).  Currently, negotiations under the UNFCCC are offering market-based mechanisms,  technology-obsessed fixes, and financial schemes as part of a basket of solutions to  solve the climate crisis. One example is the REDD mechanism which stands for  Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation. Its objective is to  reduce GHG emissions by offering incentives to developing countries to conserve  forests, which serve as natural carbon sinks. Because of the limited scope of the  original REDD, it was expanded into REDD+ to further increase forest cover through  conservation, sustainable forest management, and enhancement of forest carbon stock.  (UN-REDD 2009). One of the main criticisms is that it is a form of carbon offset, which  again allows industrialized countries and TNCs to avoid reducing their own GHG  emissions by financing emission-reduction projects in the global South.  4  Key Asks for Climate Justice and System Change  A. Climate Justice: climate change, its causes and effects are a matter  of justice, first and foremost  It is time to fully recognize that climate change is not only an environmental issue but  also a matter of justice since it arises from the gross injustices of capitalism driven by  profit and accumulation. It is not simply a matter of differing levels of development since  the historical difference in levels of development resulted from exploitation by centuries  of colonialism and continuing neocolonialism. It is a human issue with immediate  implications for jobs, homes, health, food, and lives. Those who are hit first and hardest  are those who contributed least to the problem. Climate change will only exacerbate  poverty and widen the gap between the small rich section and the poorest of the world.  Therefore, in order to address climate change and its impacts from an approach of  justice, the following aspects need to be considered:  1. The principle of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective  capabilities (CBDR-RC) is a top-bottom approach, which implies the distribution  of an equitable ¨global emissions budget¨ between developed and developing  countries. Developed nations, with only 25% of the world’s population, account  for 72% of the total emissions from 1850 to 2008. Their over-use of the world´s  ¨emissions budget¨ goes against the equal rights of all countries in the world to  have access to the use and enjoyment of atmospheric space.  2. Under the Copenhagen Accord, 85 countries pledged to reduce their emissions  or constrain their growth up to 2020. However, according to the UNEP Gap  Report 2014, there´s a gap between these pledges and the reduction required to  achieve the accord´s temperature limits. The country pledges and commitments  for 2020 result in only a moderate reduction in global emissions below business-as-  usual levels. The gap in 2020 is 8 – 10 Gt CO2e and the emissions gap in  2030 is estimated to be about 14 – 17 Gt CO2e. The report also expresses that  delaying stringent action till 2030 will further aggravate these risks and reduce  the likelihood of meeting the 2 °C target to 50 per cent or less which will impact  directly on the poorest and most vulnerable in the world (Emissions Gap Report,  2014).  3. The world requires immediate action. If we continue at the pace and will of the  international negotiations, it will take just six years of current emissions to  5  exhaust a carbon budget that would give a good chance of keeping global  warming below 1.5 degrees Celsius. What´s even more worrying is that recent  studies related to paleo-climate records show sea-levels were six to eight meters  higher than current levels when global temperatures were less than two degrees  warmer that they are now. This means that impacts will be further more adverse  threatening our society and our world in ways we are just starting to consider and  might not ready to face (Don Bain, 2015).  4. In keeping with the principle of equity, the effort to share the remaining global  emissions budget should be based on: historical responsibility, ecological  footprint, technological and financial capabilities and the state of development of  each country. Developing countries have a responsibility to change their  development pathways to more sustainable ones, but will achieve this goal in a  global framework of justice with finance, technology transfer and capacity  development from developed countries considering the overriding priorities of  developing nations. All Southern or "developing" countries should shift as quickly  as possible to more equitable, just and sustainable pathways. They must commit  to clear long term emissions reductions goals.  5. The international pledges on funding must be honored and materialized. The  annual USD100 billion pledged at the COP 15 climate talks should be the floor,  not the ceiling, additional to other commitments, and transfers should start  immediately. Climate finance should be public, non-debt creating and should go  directly to peoples of the South without big corporations and private financial  intermediaries.  6. Counting ODA (official development assistance) financing as UNFCCC-compliant  climate financing is not consistent with UNFCCC article 4.3 because such climate  financing must be new and additional. The principles of equity and common but  differentiated responsibilities are elaborated in different sets of commitments (Art.  4.1 and 4.2,5,6,7,10 and 12) that provide among others, for the cooperation in  ´climate-proofing´ economic and differentiated commitments specifically for  developed country parties in relation to financing for developing countries.  7. Climate finance must be predictable. Long-term and reliable flow of finance must  be assured rather than rely on ¨voluntary contributions¨ from industrialized  countries since these will be subject to changing administration priorities and  preferences, short-term budgetary or revenue fluctuations, and horse-trading. In  addition, climate finance must be reported systematically and transparently as  6  addition to development assistance. As a justice issue in line with the CBDR and  ´polluters pay´ principle, it is owed not as aid from rich country to poor country,  but as compensatory finance from high-emissions countries to those most  vulnerable to impacts.  8. Estimates for global climate funds vary from USD 600 billion to more than USD  1.550 trillion. Therefore, international commitments on finance should be revised  and increased according to the incremental costs of inaction and the new  discoveries of science considering adaptation, mitigation and other costs related  to the impacts of climate change.  9. There must be free worldwide access to breakthrough technologies and financial  support for the transition to sustainability, especially in renewable energy and  more input-efficient technology. This includes the removal of intellectual property  rights and trade restrictions that place severe constraints on the people´s access  to climate friendly technologies.  B. Changing the system and not the climate: shift from the logic of  capital towards the logic of nature  The over-fixation of the current development model on economic growth and profit  extraction has a fundamentally contradictory relationship with nature, since its  expansionary drive entails the continued exploitation of natural resources, ever-larger  production of waste from industry and agriculture, and insatiable consumption that also  produces waste, that are abnormal or in excess of normal needs of populations and  natural resources and carrying capacity of the environment. This contradiction  stemming from this chaotic production and consumption systems is driving climate  change and other environmental changes that endanger the long-term sustainability of  life in general and the survival of particular species including human kind. In order to  embark in a transition to a more sustainable world, the following aspects are to be  considered:  1. In an ecological transition, science is indispensable for human development.  But, like any other tool, it has to function and grow more holistically. Innovation  and creativity, unshackled by the capitalist imperatives of competition,  marketability and profitability, should give rise to free and fuller development of  socially and environmentally beneficial technologies.  7  2. Extremely destructive and carbon-belching methods will have to be stopped then  soonest. Society has to undertake a transition period where the most problematic  or dirtiest branches and methods of production are steadily phased out, while  other existing ones are adapted and new, more sustainable methods are  introduced and expanded.  3. In agriculture, production should be towards ecologically sound, sustainable  production methods that conserve local ecosystems and traditional knowledge as  well as utilize appropriate farmer-controlled technologies. Consumers deserve to  be well informed about the origin and forms of productions but also bear the  responsibility to demand and look for such information as well as to support  small, local, organic farming in rural and urban environments.  4. In manufacturing, extraction and construction industries, productivity should be  continuously improved not necessarily to increase output but always to reduce  inputs of labor, energy and raw materials, as well as impose stricter limits on  waste output and environmental impact.  5. In energy production, distribution and consumption, societies should phase out  fossil fuel-based energy while scaling up alternative energy sources that are less  polluting or hazardous, more renewable, and more technically manageable.  Decentralized systems can give communities better control over energy  infrastructure and therefore better access to energy.  6. Consumer frenzy, like a destructive addiction, leads to the very opposite results  of a holistic understanding of well-being. In an alternative social system the  higher goal becomes the development of human potentials, through education,  culture, and participation in community life. Striving for human development  means a more conscious and collective effort to balance quantitative with  qualitative indicators, and material aspects with cultural and social aspects of  wellbeing.  7. In the advanced industrialized countries, economic development has reached the  point where production and consumption levels have long surpassed the real  needs of their population. These countries need to start a process of  redistribution of resources both within these countries and towards the less  developed countries of the South. The challenge in the North is how they can  reduce resource consumption within sustainable limits and in the context of truly  achieving social equality.  8  8. Meanwhile, in the global South, countries need to find new ways to develop  agricultural production to feed their people, create decent jobs, livelihood and  incomes, produce raw material inputs for environmentally friendly industry  respecting mother earth rights, increase purchasing power for goods and  services of real need and generate surplus for reinvestment from a social and  environmental perspective. The great challenge of the South is to address the  needs of the poorest through new vision and understanding of life and well-being.  9. The excessive demands and unsustainable lifestyles among the richer segments  place immense stress on the environment. There must be strong regulatory  mechanisms and limits in forms of taxes in the use of luxury products and  services. These products and those that do not attend the real needs of our  societies and communities should internalize the real environmental and social  costs of their production.  10. Market-based mechanisms (such as carbon trading schemes and REDD) cannot  be presented as solutions to the climate crisis since markets in the current  system are primarily driven by private appropriation of profits, and not the real  needs of society or the planet and the effectiveness of their contribution to  reducing emissions has been proven to be scarce. Technical solutions such as  geo-engineering or ´climate-smart agriculture´, appear only when there´s no will  to solve deep societal problems and they cause not only direct negative  impacts of the technologies themselves, but also trigger harmful activities that  are enabled by choosing a technofix approach that diverts from real solutions.  11. Real, fundamental, low- to no-risk, beneficial, long-term solutions to climate  change are already available. The main barriers to their implementation are the  polluting industries and their investors. A quick way to check the credibility and  goodwill of any geo-engineering or market based schemes proponent is to  examine how much real effort they have put into advocating for real solutions to  climate change – and to look at where their money is coming from.  C. People´s sovereignty in decision making and planning  The reason why human societies have economies is so we can produce and distribute  what we need to live, and to live well as individuals and as communities. We have seen  how capitalism puts profit over need in making decisions on what to produce, how to  produce, and how much to produce. Capitalists are able to pursue such misplaced but  profitable business decisions because they control the basic means of production. This  unequal structure of ownership is behind the profit dynamic that brings environmental  destruction, as well as exploitation, inequality, mass poverty, and oppression. The  people organized in communities, civil society organizations and other genuine  9  participatory structures are the foundation of sovereignty. In order to materialize  people´s sovereignty into ownership over productive resources these key points are to  be addressed:  1. Communities and marginalized peoples have the right to proportionate control  over planning, decision-making and management of initiatives and projects  devoted to climate change as well as to access to information, funds and  technologies. They have essential roles in defining, guiding and determining the  work of conferences and official processes for defining and managing climate  action at the local, national, regional and global levels. They should be afforded  equitable representation, meaningful participation and the power to decide over  what means to use in mitigation and adaptation.  2. Most countries, in varying degrees, are caught in the web of the global capitalist  system and are highly dependent on Northern consumer markets and sources of  finance. An abrupt or uncoordinated global transition where countries go their  own way can have very adverse consequences for the poor. International  governance and cooperation are necessary to make the global transition less  painful, positively reinforcing, and more equitable. International development  cooperation, North-to-South transfers, and South-to-South cooperation can build  on accepted principles such as country ownership, democracy and human rights,  to help facilitate the long-term reorientation of Southern development into more  sustainable and equitable development pathways.  3. The range of property rights regimes must move decisively away from an  overwhelming emphasis on private and capitalist-oriented property rights towards  more democratic, cooperative, and community-based forms of property  ownership and control or management.  4. Countries and peoples of the global South should reclaim sovereign control of  their productive and natural resources and delink them from the structures of  monopoly capitalism in order to use them for their own self-determined  development. Agrarian countries and agricultural communities can do this by  breaking the monopoly control of giant agribusiness and big landlords over land,  water, seeds and animal stock, energy sources, and other inputs and productive  assets.  5. Food production must be mainly aimed at meeting the needs of local  communities and national self-sufficiency. Access to food must be premised on  the absolute right to food of every person—food that is nutritious, safe, culturally  appropriate, and affordable.  6. Egalitarian and cooperative land tenure and land use systems should be  promoted to ensure the collective control and ecologically sustainable use of  land, water, rangeland, forest and marine resources by farmers, fishers,  pastoralists, and local mixed-economy communities.  7. In particular, the energy sector that is pivotal to the economy and to the  environment as well should mainly be publicly owned. Such ownership would  allow the public to exercise democratic control over the overhauling of existing  energy systems towards sustainable energy systems.  8. Public ownership will also be the basis for developing and promoting  transportation systems of varying appropriate scales, from bulk and long haul  transport by land, air and sea, to shorter range transport services within a region,  metropolis or rural district, with emphasis on mass transport. The automotive  industry should be taken over immediately by the state and the entire transport  sector should be regulated.  9. The finance sector is another strategic sector that must be immediately placed  under public control. By putting banks under public control, financial resources  may be rationally redirected to investments in urgently needed social services  (public health, education and decent housing) as well as investments in  renewable energy, public transportation, sustainable agriculture, and low-carbon  manufacturing.  10. Nations and communities around the world have the right to choose their  development pathways free from colonial and imperialist models based on  justice, human rights and mother earth rights.  These changes will not be achieved inside international negotiations like the  UNFCCC since only governments run by the elite and influenced by the interests  of corporations lead them. Only the people and their organizations and  movements can redefine and manage a rights-based development that is just for  people and planet.