 Business/Financial, Saturday, March 1, 2008 756 mots, p. C 2

SATURDAY INTERVIEW

Concerns About the Climate That Go Beyond Snow
By PATRICIA R. OLSEN

MENTION global warming and there is a good chance the conversation will turn to the future of ski resorts. But Rob Katz, chief executive of Vail Resorts, is not worried. Vail had more snow in a recent 30-day period than it has had in the last 10 years. And should snowfall decrease significantly in the future, Mr. Katz said, there will be greater concerns than how much snow there is.

In an industry that averages $2 billion in annual revenue in the United States, according to a report in January by First Research, Vail Resorts is a heavyweight. The company's five ski resorts are Vail, Breckenridge, Beaver Creek and Keystone in Colorado, and Heavenly, which straddles California and Nevada. The first three consistently get high marks in Ski Magazine.

The company has several energy-conservation and earth-friendly programs, including partnerships with wind farms across the country to offset its energy use. Vail Resorts pays its utility bills and then invests, through renewable energy credits, in developing new wind farms.

In addition, Vail intends to purchase "green" construction materials for future building projects and work with the Forest Service to preserve trees. In new developments, the company plans to use a geothermal process that relies on ground source heat pumps to collect heat from the earth and melt the snow on streets and sidewalks. Mr. Katz recently discussed global warming; Vail's focus, environmental and otherwise; and his company's customers. Following are excerpts from that interview:

Q.You don't sound overly concerned about the effect of global warming on your operations. Why not?

A. Climate is only one part of the environment, and it's a planetary issue. When people ask me if I'm worried about global warming, I tell them I'm worried as a parent. If Colorado is going to be as warm as Mexico in 50 years, then we all have more to worry about than skiing at Vail. We have higher priorities directly related to our local ecosystem, such as improving the wildlife habitat and keeping the water clean.

In the businesses we're in -- whether you look at our skiing, lodging, retail or real estate development business -- what we sell is the outdoors. Because that's our product, we have a responsibility and an opportunity. The responsibility is to do the right thing for something we're using to make money, and the opportunity is to deepen our relationship with our guests by keeping our spectacular settings beautiful. That has been the push for us.

Q.What steps have you taken to stay viable as an industry?

A. We're doing what we're doing because it's the right thing to do. So for example, using wind power helps global climate change, but we're also diversifying our fuel source. There is other pollution that comes from coal, for instance, so there's a whole range of impact that fossil fuels have. The steps we're taking are less about our viability as a business than doing the right thing for the product we sell.

Q.When did you begin the renewable energy credits program to offset your use of fossil fuels? What is the scope of your effort?

A. We started the program in August of 2006. We purchase 152,000 megawatt-hours and are right behind Whole Foods.

Q.Has the skier demographic changed in the last 5 or 10 years?

A. I think our audience has widened in the last few years. We're seeing an expansion at our top end. More frequent grooming of the slopes and shaped skis, which are wider, have allowed people to continue enjoying the sport longer. People who aren't as athletic as many skiers are also able to enjoy the sport. The advent of twin-tip skis, freestyle skiing and terrain parks for snowboarders, with jumps and rails and all those crazy things, has also increased the number of skier days for 10- to 20-year-olds. That's not necessarily our target market, but the parents of those kids are looking for vacations that keep the kids happy and occupied, and skiing resonates with them.

Also, people are spending more time at work and have more stress. They're looking for vacations that allow them an outlet.

Q.Why didn't you buy any of the American Ski Company properties when that company was selling off ski resorts in 2006? Why haven't you ever expanded into the Northeast?

A. We're focused on buying a resort that we think fits with what we have today -- a very high-quality experience but also one that's large enough to be a very successful business. You have a lot of fixed costs in opening a resort. Adding skiers doesn't cost that much. I wouldn't say we'd never buy a property in the Northeast, but our bigger focus has been in the West.

Q.Having snowboarders and skiers share the slopes has been controversial. What's the solution?

A. We're not seeing the same issues we saw 10 or 15 years ago. The 50-year-old who likes snowboarding may not cause as much commotion on a snowboard as a 17-year-old. The 17-year-olds tend to gravitate toward the terrain parks, where there are all kinds of jumps and tricks. I'm a pretty enthusiastic skier, and I never go into the terrain parks. I'm scared. The key is to go to an area that provides a place snowboarders and freestyle skiers gravitate to.

Q.How often do you get to ski?

A. If my 7- and 9-year-olds have anything to say about it, I'll get in about 40 days this year.
