

Financial Times (web site)
Friday, February 19, 2021 - Z 1824 mots

Federal Reserve zeroes in on climate risk

Billy Nauman and Kristen Talman

Good morning from New York. It has been a relatively quiet week around the (virtual) ofﬁce because many of
our colleagues have been on holiday with local schools closed for winter break. But the world of sustainable
ﬁnance stops for no one. And we are here on duty bringing you the latest, including an important update
from the Federal Reserve on climate change, a look at what's next for the UK activists at Extinction Rebellion,
an examination of cryptocurrencies' ESG failings and some news on a couple of huge, new sustainability-
linked loans.

Fed's Brainard backs mandatory climate disclosure

A lot has changed in the month since Donald Trump left ofﬁce and Joe Biden took over as US president. This
is perhaps most evident in the Federal Reserve's approach to climate change.

After years of silence on the topic, the Fed has started to put climate issues centre stage. Shortly after Biden
won the election, the central bank highlighted climate change as a threat to ﬁnancial stability and moved to
join the Network for Greening the Financial System, a consortium of central banks dedicated to supporting
the goals of the Paris climate accord.

Now with Trump out of ofﬁce and the Biden administration pushing hard to make up lost ground in the
climate ﬁght, Fed ofﬁcials are speaking out more explicitly about climate risk and how they intend to take
action.

"Financial institutions that do not put in place frameworks to measure, monitor, and manage climate-related
risks could face outsized losses on climate-sensitive assets caused by environmental shifts, by a disorderly
transition to a low-carbon economy, or by a combination of both," said Federal Reserve governor Lael
Brainard, at the Institute of International Finance's inaugural climate ﬁnance summit yesterday.

This might sound underwhelming to our European readers, but for the central bank of a country that has
been led for the past four years by a man who claimed climate change was a Chinese hoax, it represents
major progress.

The change in tone is not just coming from the Fed, either. John Coates , the newly appointed acting
director of corporation ﬁnance at the Securities and Exchange Commission, also spoke at the IIF event and
made it clear that climate denialism is not on the agency's agenda.

"Personally I'm going to do my part to help the SEC policy keep pace with developments that are affecting
investors and public companies and capital markets . . . And in case anybody had any doubts [that] means
respecting science and evidence and reality," he said.

And Rostin Behnam , acting chairman of the US Commodity Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), said he
was looking to "narrow the focus on what the CFTC can do" to support carbon markets and the transition to
a low-carbon economy.

The ﬁnancial sector is also signalling it is on board. The IIF, which represents more than 450 global ﬁnancial
services institutions, joined up with 10 other ﬁnancial industry trade groups to publish a framework for how it
believes the US transition to a low-carbon economy should take shape.

A signiﬁcant issue highlighted by all of these parties is the lack of consistent data, and the Fed's Brainard
indicated that the US should consider making climate disclosures mandatory for companies.

"Current voluntary disclosure practices are an important ﬁrst step, but they are prone to variable quality,
incompleteness, and a lack of actionable data," she added. "Ultimately, moving towards standardised, reliable
and mandatory disclosures could provide better access to the data required to appropriately manage risks."



There will be a lot of political hurdles to clear if US policymakers are to try to implement something like the
EU's  green  taxonomy,   or   New  Zealand's  mandatory   Task   Force   on   Climate-related   Financial   Disclosures

 



(TCFD) reporting requirements.


But Brainard's comments are a strong indicator of the way the wind is blowing, and that should catch the
attention of every executive in the country.

Even   without   mandatory   disclosure   requirements,   there   are   still   ways   regulators   can   help   ﬁx   the   data
problem.

With   a   growing   number   of   institutional   investors   demanding   ESG   information   from   companies,   these
disclosures are becoming mandatory by default, the SEC's Coates said. And when companies "volunteer" this
information, they are legally obliged to tell the truth, which gives regulators an opening to get involved.

"If   companies   are   making   voluntary   disclosures,   for   example   in   sustainability   reports   .   .   .   they   can't   be
misleading the market in a material way, even in those non SEC-ﬁled documents," Coates said. "And I worry
sometimes   that   the   people   involved   in   the   production   and   consumption   of   those   documents   don't
remember that."

We're willing to bet it will be easier for companies to remember that obligation after being hit with their ﬁrst
climate disclosure-related lawsuit. And we will be anxiously watching to see how the US regulators take
action. (Billy Nauman)

Sustainability-linked loan market soars with AB InBev, Carlyle deals

All the talk out of Washington and the IIF is just one sign of the growing prominence of sustainable ﬁnance -
there were also some pretty substantial deals struck this week.

Anheuser-Busch   InBev,   the   maker   of   Budweiser   and   Stella   Artois,   yesterday   inked   the   largest-ever
sustainability-linked loan - a $10.1bn revolving line of credit that will be more expensive if the brewer fails to
meet a set of ESG goals linked to water use, plastic recycling, clean energy and emissions reductions.

Private equity company Carlyle this week also announced a $4.1bn loan with terms tied to diversity and
inclusion. It will receive a discount on borrowing costs if it hits its goal of having women and minorities make
up at least 30 per cent of the board members of the companies it controls.

These   deals   represent   a   major   surge   in   sustainable   lending.   As   of   January   31,   only   $8.6bn   worth   of
sustainability-linked loans had hit the market this year, according to Bloomberg New Energy Finance.

It is noteworthy that both of these loans are replacing existing lines of credit, and both are tied to ESG goals
already set by the companies. In theory, this shows how banks (most of which have set ESG goals of their
own)   can   promote   wider   responsible   business   practices   through   their   lending   operations,   and   how
companies can use sustainable ﬁnance to make sure they stay on track with their sustainability goals.

Proponents   of   sustainability-linked   bonds   and   loans   also   point   out   that   these   instruments   have   an
advantage over green bonds and loans (which companies use to fund speciﬁc environmentally oriented
projects) because they incentivise company-wide ESG improvements.

But for any of this to work, the goals being set need to be ambitious, and the carrots and sticks that come
with these loans need to be substantial. Otherwise, the potential for greenwashing (or ESG-washing) is a
problem.

Neither AB InBev nor Carlyle would provide speciﬁcs on just how much of a penalty they would face if they
did not hit their goals. Both companies assured Moral Money that the incentives were meaningful, but
without more information, it is impossible to judge from the outside.

As more of these deals roll in, it is clear why data and transparency are top priorities in the ESG world. (Billy
Nauman)

These climate activists want you to dish dirt on your company

This month, some FT Weekend readers in the London area received an unauthorised insert in their February
6-7 edition of How To Spend It. In it, was a call to "whistleblow for the planet".

Behind the insert was Extinction Rebellion, or XR for short - an activist group pushing for climate action from
governing bodies and companies. The group solicited FT readers to out corporate climate misdeeds on its
new platform, TruthTeller.Life.



 



The move is part of XR's plan to get back on its feet this year after its Covid-19 "hibernation", which made it
difﬁcult to organise and raise funds. The environmentalist group struggled to gain traction amid 2020's
competing crises of climate change, the pandemic and wider racial injustice - all while it battled leadership
conﬂicts within its ranks.


Now the group is targeting potential whistleblowers as a core part of its new strategy as it works to redeﬁne
activism in the Covid-19 era. In addition to targeting FT readers, XR is also using LinkedIn ads calling on
workers at companies such as Shell, Exxon, HSBC and HS2 to share "what they know".

But in an age of high unemployment, leaning on employees to be the curtain-revealing stakeholders might
be a bold move.

If you received a copy of "How to Save It" or have been targeted with XR's LinkedIn ads, we would love to hear
your   thoughts.   As   always,   email   us   at   moralmoneyreply@ft.com   ().  (Kristen
Talman)

Cryptos' ESG problems go far beyond climate

Last week we wrote about Tesla's big bitcoin purchase and asked whether or not it had diminished the
electric car company's green credentials. Cryptocurrency mining, of course, consumes a lot of energy and
scientists have estimated the emissions tied to the industry rival those of nations such as Sri Lanka.

But greenhouse gas emissions are only one of cryptos' ESG issues. As Martin CW Walker , director of banking
and ﬁnance at the Center for Evidence-Based Management, wrote in a piece published by the London
School of Economics, cryptocurrency also has big problems with "S" and "G".

On the social side, Walker concedes that crypto may have some privacy beneﬁts, but he claims those are far
outweighed by the fact that cryptocurrencies "facilitate criminal activity including tax evasion and evasion of
exchange controls".

He   also   dismisses   arguments   that   crypto   promotes   ﬁnancial   inclusion   and   highlights   the   consumer
protection problems created by those who manipulate crypto prices by publishing "demonstrably false"
information that would be "illegal if provided by those offering other classes of assets for investments".

As fund managers promoting ESG start dipping their toes into the crypto market, it will be interesting to see
how   their   clients   and   sustainability   advocates   react.   As   Walker   sees   it,   the   issue   is   cut   and   dried:   "Any
mainstream fund manager or pension fund seeking to place a portion of their portfolio in crypto risks
severely undermining their ESG credentials." ( Billy Nauman )

Chart of the day

The push to increase renewable energy in the US is not just about switching away from fossil fuels. There is
also a need to upgrade the infrastructure to make sure that the green power that is being generated can get
where it needs to go. And that is sparking a ﬁght as people object to "stringing the land with ugly wires" and
"hefty corporate rivals" aim to prevent green power companies from seizing market share.

Further reading

Harassment, pay and glass ceiling highlight consultancy gender gap (FT)

Surge in ESG Questions Prompts Managers to Adopt More Tech (FundFire)

Saving the planet is a software challenge too (FT)

Inside the London lab making climate-action clothes (HTSI)

Renewable energy: green bubble trouble (FT)

Daimler rules out 'premature' end to combustion engine sales (FT)

Pressure to Disclose Director Race, Gender Ramps Up (Agenda)






 


