

Financial Times
News, Saturday, March 6, 2021 490 mots, p. 2

Keep fossil fuel shares, minister tells pension funds
Climate change

Josephine Cumbo

Pension funds should not dump holdings of fossil fuel companies despite the growing pressure on asset
managers to divest "planet-wrecking" stocks, a government minister has said.

Guy Opperman, pensions minister, said the funds managing the retirement savings of millions of investors
would impede broader efforts to tackle climate change if they ofﬂoaded shares in companies with high
carbon footprints, such as oil and gas suppliers.

"I massively believe that it is perfectly appropriate for trustees to hold stocks in the likes of Shell or BP; I do
not want them to divest," Opperman said in an interview with the Financial Times.

"What we want is a partnership between trustees, asset managers, and the companies as these companies
transform themselves into clean energy companies and ﬁnd the solutions that we all need for net zero."

A number of ethical investment products, marketed as "fossil fuel free", have launched in the UK, often
holding technology and ﬁnancial stocks rather than those of fossil fuel companies.

"Merely selling your stocks that make you look bad from a fossil fuels standpoint is a reverse greenwashing
because it doesn't actually ﬁx the problem," said Opperman.

The minister's comments come as pressure grows on some of the UK's largest public sector pension funds to
drop "planet-wrecking" stocks.

Analysis released this week by campaign groups Platform and Friends of the Earth found that British town
hall pension plans held £9.7bn of investments in fossil fuel companies in the 2019-20 ﬁnancial year.

"If the government is serious about showing leadership on climate ahead of COP26 [the UN climate change
conference in November], it needs to stop fooling itself that continuing to invest in fossil fuel companies
offers any solution to the climate crisis," said Rianna Gargiulo, divestment campaigner at Friends of the Earth.
"All this talk of engaging with fossil fuel companies to help them change for the better ignores the vast sums
of money they pump into political lobbying and further extraction, and their stated commitment to burning
all of their reserves."

Some private sector retirement schemes have outlined plans to rid their portfolios of the most harmful fossil
fuel holdings. Scottish Widows, which has £170bn of funds under management, said in November it would
divest at least £440m from companies that had failed to meet its ethical investing test, including those that
derive more than 10 per cent of revenue from thermal coal and tar sands.

"Scottish Widows strives to engage with and inﬂuence companies it invests in to drive positive change," the
company said. "Its exclusions focus on companies it believes pose the most severe investment risk due to the
nature of their businesses."

ShareAction,   the   campaign   group,   said   it   "largely"   supported   Opperman's   approach   but   said   pension
schemes should not fear dumping stocks.

"A credible escalation strategy has to include the possibility of divestment when all else fails," said Catherine
Howarth, its chief executive.

