

The New York Times (web site)
Friday, February 26, 2021 -  378 mots

The S.E.C. ﬁres a ‘warning ﬂare’ on climate change.

By Ephrat Livni

The Securities and Exchange Commission announced this week that it would “enhance its focus on climate-
related disclosure in public company ﬁlings” and eventually update guidelines issued in 2010.

The timing of the announcement comes just days before the Senate conﬁrmation hearings for Gary Gensler,
President Biden’s pick to lead the commission, puts the issue “front and center,” the securities law partner
Joseph Hall of Davis Polk told the DealBook newsletter.

The regulator “is setting the stage, sending a signal that we are no longer in an administration where
‘climate change’ is a forbidden term,” Mr. Hall said. “It’s a warning ﬂare to let people know new disclosure
rules are coming down the pike.” He predicted that “senators will be all over this” issue during next week’s
hearings, and “battle lines will be drawn.”

Democrats will probably push Mr. Gensler on adopting speciﬁc disclosure requirements, tied to metrics,
which   are   more   burdensome   for   companies   but   make   cross-industry   comparisons   easier,   Mr.   Hall   said.
Republicans will probably lobby for a principles-based system that gives companies extra leeway but critics
say is too vague. The S.E.C. is likely to try to strike a balance, Mr. Hall believes, but whatever happens, any
move on climate-related disclosures will be “hugely consequential.”

“It’s a signiﬁcant statement and one companies can see as an opportunity,” said Wes Bricker a vice chair of
PricewaterhouseCoopers and a former chief accountant at the S.E.C.

Mr. Bricker said he thought that many companies had already moved beyond requirements under the old
framework, responding to the market’s increasing demands for transparency on their environmental impact.
For companies that are not there yet, the S.E.C.’s announcement is a reminder of the direction things are
heading.

Surveying the climate-related disclosure scene across companies and grappling with an understanding of
what matters to investors now is “very constructive,” Mr. Bricker said.

It may be some time before any changes are mandated, but he said that there was likely to be an immediate
effect anyway. He believes that the S.E.C.’s message will begin to subtly nudge any company that is on the
fence about a disclosure toward more transparency.



 


