

The New York Times (web site)
Wednesday, March 31, 2021 -  1075 mots

Biden’s Climate Plan Means Tough Choices: Which Homes
Get Saved?

By Christopher Flavelle

The proposal represents an enormous effort to ﬁght climate change, but it sidesteps the question of who will
be forced to move because of rising water.

WASHINGTON — President Biden’s $2 trillion infrastructure plan represents an enormous effort to protect
Americans from climate change, but it sidesteps one of the most immediate and wrenching dilemmas:
Deciding not just where to spend more money on roads, bridges or sea walls, but where to stop spending —
and instead, help people get out of the way.

The need to make difﬁcult decisions like these reﬂects the growing consensus among experts that not every
community in the United States can be protected in the long run. Some areas — particularly in some coastal
zones, but also inland along rivers and other areas where ﬂooding is worsening with climate change — can’t
successfully be defended no matter how much money the government might be willing to throw into
fortiﬁcations, drainage upgrades or other improvements.

Deciding which areas should be abandoned, and when, is one of the most urgent and difﬁcult challenges
facing the United States. The decision is deeply emotional, because it involves uprooting lives and destroying
communities. The ﬁnancial consequences are also sweeping, since property values are likely to plummet,
along with the life savings of people who live there.

As   a   result,   ﬁguring   out   how   to   plan   for   retreat   is   among   the   hardest   decisions   facing   policymakers,
according to people who have worked on climate resilience.

“It’s an enormous challenge — the politics are very difﬁcult,” said Alice Hill, who planned for managing
climate effects at the National Security Council during the Obama administration. At that point, she said, the
government wasn’t ready to tell people in vulnerable towns and cities, “You really want that bridge and
you’re not going to get it, because your community’s going to be washed away.”

But as disasters become more devastating and frequent, Ms. Hill added, that conversation can no longer be
avoided. “It’s deﬁnitely time,” she said.

The scale of the challenge is enormous, with as much as half a trillion dollars of coastal real estate expected
to be underwater by the end of the century.

The idea is that communities facing insurmountable risks can either retreat from the most threatened areas
in an organized way, before disaster strikes, or afterward. But either way, retreat in some places will be
necessary.

Across the country, communities are already struggling to make difﬁcult choices.

Louisiana, for example, has divided its southeastern coast — parts of which are being lost to rising seas — into
low,   medium   and   high-risk   zones,   with   the   goal   of   having   the   high-risk   zones   “transition   away   from
permanent residential development.” Instead, development of new infrastructure would be focused further
inland to accommodate the expected wave of new arrivals.

The Florida Keys delivered a similar message to residents, saying there wasn’t enough money to elevate
every county road above the rising sea. Decisions about infrastructure spending, ofﬁcials warned, were
necessarily becoming decisions about which places to try to protect, and which places to let go.

In the Outer Banks of North Carolina, residents are being asked to pay higher property taxes — in some
cases, increases of almost 50 percent — to protect the main road from being washed away by storms,
prompting concern about how long that solution can last.



And  last  year   Virginia   issued  a   coastal   development  plan  that  bluntly  acknowledged  that  ﬂooding   and

 



inundation   would   force   retreat   from   many   coastal   areas,   requiring   public   and   private   buildings   and
infrastructure to be moved to higher ground “to avoid destruction.”


“Some Virginia residents and communities will face difﬁcult choices about relocation,” Matthew J. Strickler,
Virginia’s secretary of natural resources, said by email. “We are not shying away from talking about this.”

Even previous administrations, including that of President Donald J. Trump, have acknowledged that some
places can’t be saved.

In the ﬁnal weeks of the Obama administration, when Mr. Biden served as vice president, the White House
sought to create what it called a working group on managed retreat, to coordinate policies across the federal
government   for   relocating   communities   that   wanted   to   move.   It   deﬁned   retreat   as   “a   complete
abandonment of that community.”

While   Mr.   Trump   was   president,   that   idea   continued   to   gain   momentum   after   a   series   of   devastating
hurricanes. Agencies that help communities rebuild after disasters began pushing harder for what they
called “large-scale migration or relocation,” through buying and demolishing vulnerable homes. The Army
Corps of Engineers even began telling local communities that, to get some kinds of federal aid, they must be
willing to evict reluctant homeowners from hard-to-protect houses.

But taking that logic one step further, and restricting new federal infrastructure spending for those areas,
was too challenging, Ms. Hill said.

The question came up again during the Trump administration but was quickly rejected, according to a
former   administration   ofﬁcial   who   worked   on   resilience   issues   and   requested   anonymity   because   they
weren’t authorized by their current employer to speak to the media.

Mr. Biden’s infrastructure proposal suggests that political pressure remains.

The   proposal   doesn’t   include   the   word   retreat,   but   it   does   call   for   “relocation   assistance   to   support
community-led transitions for the most vulnerable tribal communities.” The plan doesn’t say why relocation
assistance  would  speciﬁcally  apply   to  Native   American  communities.   In  an  interview,   an  administration
ofﬁcial, who agreed to discuss the proposal on the condition that he not be identiﬁed by name, said the
infrastructure   package   included   money   to   improve   data   about   future   climate   risks.   That   would   allow
governments to better understand the threats facing new projects, the person said, and incorporate that
information into decisions about how and where to build.

Jainey Bavishi, who worked on managed-retreat policy as a senior ofﬁcial in the Obama administration, said
the question was challenging because it goes beyond engineering and ﬁnance.

Deciding where to pull back is also about race and equity, she said, since many vulnerable areas are also
minority communities that have suffered a lack of government investment in the past. Retreat also impacts
other policy problems, like the availability of affordable housing and the impact on families’ ﬁnancial health.

“Talking about where people can live, and where people cannot, is ultimately what this is about,” said Ms.
Bavishi, who is now director of the Mayor’s Ofﬁce of Resiliency in New York City. “And those are really, really
difﬁcult conversations to have.”





 


