

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
Editorial, Friday, March 5, 2021 1040 mots, p. A 23

The Climate Cost of Steel and Concrete

By Rebecca Dell

There are cleaner ways to produce the building blocks of the nation.

You've probably spent a lot of time over the past year looking out the window while staying clear of the
pandemic. If you're a city dweller like me, no doubt you see mostly concrete, steel and maybe sky.

Roads   and   sidewalks,   apartments   and   ofﬁce   buildings,   overpasses   and   embankments,   cars   and   buses,
streetlights and even statues -- they're all made of concrete and steel. And there's even more of it out of
sight, in sewer mains, electricity transmission lines, foundations, ducts and girders.

It's the stuff of modern life, and we use it in astonishing quantities. Last year, around the world, nearly two
billion tons of steel was produced -- more than 500 pounds for every person on earth. And at least 30 billion
tons of concrete, or nearly 9,000 pounds for each of us. The scale can be hard to believe, until you look at a
runway or a suspension bridge and contemplate what was required to build it.

But all the comfort, security and convenience provided by things made of steel and concrete comes at a cost.
Making steel and cement -- the main ingredient in concrete -- generates about 15 percent of all global
emissions of carbon dioxide, the gas most responsible for the climate crisis. In the United States, industrial
sources like steel mills and cement kilns are also the leading source of some of the most damaging types of
air pollution. We can't solve climate or pollution problems if we don't clean up these industries.

This is particularly urgent. In the coming years and decades, the United States will need a lot more steel and
concrete. Roads are crumbling, mass transit is unavailable, many communities still don't have access to high-
speed internet, drinking water is contaminated, and a nasty winter storm left millions of Texans without
power. Climate change is only going to increase the need for infrastructure, from wind turbines to ﬂood
control systems.

Last month, in an Oval Ofﬁce meeting to discuss infrastructure and workers' rights with the leaders of major
unions, President Biden noted that the United States ranks "like 38th in the world in terms of infrastructure,
everything from canals to highways to airports." On Wednesday, the American Society of Civil Engineers gave
American infrastructure a grade of C-, warning of "signiﬁcant deﬁciencies."

Both political parties want to turn that around.

But a single major infrastructure investment from Congress could increase U.S. carbon dioxide emissions by
200 million tons, or almost 4 percent of national annual emissions. For comparison, in the decade before
2019, the United States managed to decrease annual emissions by only some 220 million tons. We can't
afford to build in a way that emits huge amounts of climate-changing gases, adding to the climate problem
at the same time we're trying to ﬁx it.

Fortunately, we don't have to. Most infrastructure is paid for with tax dollars, so the public can insist that we
build it in a cleaner way. This is the idea behind the Buy Clean campaign, an effort by a growing number of
governments and corporations to change the way products are made by demanding low-carbon production
and supply chains for what they purchase. This will hardly affect the cost to taxpayers, because steel and
cement are a very small portion of the total cost of projects. For example, the eastern span of the bridge
between San Francisco and Oakland, Calif., that was ﬁnished in 2013 cost California taxpayers more than $6
billion, but less than $25 million of that -- less than one half of 1 percent of the cost -- was spent on cement.

States are starting to experiment with this approach. California has a policy that sets a maximum level of
greenhouse gas emissions per unit of material for some building materials. Lawmakers in New York and New
Jersey are considering a plan that would award a credit to contractors for public construction projects that
use cement and concrete produced with low greenhouse gas emissions.



There are things we can do to reduce emissions immediately. Concrete mixes are available that are just as

 



strong but have less of the ingredients that emit the most carbon dioxide. Multiple studies have found that
this could reduce carbon dioxide emissions by 20 percent or more. These recipes are already in wide use in
Europe and elsewhere. We could use electricity from renewable sources to make recycled steel, like a steel
mill in Colorado, to reduce emissions from steel production by a similar amount.


Those 20 percent reductions are very valuable and we should get moving on them right away, but they're not
going to get us to the long-term climate goal of net-zero greenhouse gas emissions. That's why the country
needs   to   make   serious   investments   in   the   many   new   ideas   for   making   steel   and   concrete   with   zero
emissions, to create incentives to buy them and to invest in the workers and communities that produce
them.

Meeting the nation's climate goals doesn't have to be a burden on American manufacturing -- it can make
our products and technology more competitive around the world. Smart climate standards can create new
manufacturing and construction jobs and with them new ladders to the middle class.

Infrastructure investment is one of the few things both political parties agree on. But how we build affects
how we breathe and what kind of climate we have to live in. Most people don't notice the steel and concrete
around them, and they don't see how it's changing the climate. We need to recognize the problem and then
recognize our power to ﬁx it.

Rebecca Dell (@rebeccawdell) is the director the industry program at the ClimateWorks Foundation, which
works with philanthropies to slow climate change. She worked at the Department of Energy in the Obama
administration.

