

The New York Times (web site)
Friday, March 19, 2021 -  1475 mots

The Daily: When Climate Change Comes to Your Yard

Interviewing a climate change skeptic who brought wind power to his community. Plus, a dispatch from a
live concert and a new season of Still Processing.

Hi everyone, happy Friday. Last week, we asked you to tell us your favorite episode from the week, and our
team Slack channel was soon ﬁlled with screenshots of your kind messages. So thank you, we appreciate you
listening and sharing.

In today’s newsletter, we have two notes from our recent guests: Dionne Searcey writes about the conﬂicted
reality of climate denialism in Rawlins, Wyo., and Isabel Kershner writes a letter from the future about
attending concerts in Israel. And ﬁnally, Still Processing is back for a new season (!), with an episode both
provocative and personal. Check it out.

Meeting Mayor Terry Weickum

On Tuesday’s episode, we visited coal country via Terry Weickum, the mayor of Rawlins, Wyo., a town of 9,000.
He spoke to our correspondent Dionne Searcey about his town and what makes it beautiful, the pain of the
decline of the coal industry and why he’s come to embrace wind energy. We asked Dionne what made Terry
such a compelling character:

The minute Terry Weickum picked up the phone I knew I was going to focus a story on him. His folksy humor,
colloquialisms and general vibe was just a joy to engage with, even as he spoke on a difﬁcult topic: the
closure of coal mines in Carbon County.

Mr. Weickum loves his community and was cut up when his friends moved away after losing coal jobs. But
he didn’t just “walk around on his bottom lip,” as he likes to say. (That’s Wyoming-speak for pouting.) He did
something about it. He won a seat on the county commissioners board and got to work trying to decide
whether he should welcome renewable energy to an area built on coal — and one that still proﬁts from fossil
fuel revenue.

After a lot of anguish and consultation with leaders and residents across the state, and after sifting through
the   particulars   of   pitches   from   wind   developers,   Mr.   Weickum   decided   to   vote   for   the   wind   projects,
including one that is on track to be perhaps the biggest in the nation.

Still, he isn’t so sure climate change is real. I got coffee at a local spot in Rawlins with Mr. Weickum and one of
his friends, a retired coal worker, as they explained their views that eschewed the veriﬁed science behind
human-induced climate change. Mr. Weickum told me about how he got a lot of ﬂack for his decision to
support wind, even from his friends.

But he knew the revenues would help his community. Now, as mayor of Rawlins, he is seeing that come to
fruition with budget surpluses from wind revenue. His decision shows that selling communities on the moral
case for ﬁghting climate change might not be the best path forward in some areas for pushing green
energy.

Climate change denialism in Rawlins is as widespread as mule deer. I saw the creatures with their teddy-bear
ears lounging in the cemetery, the high school football ﬁeld and in front yards across town. Everyone had a
story about them. Mr. Weickum and his coal miner friend told me about how they had been chased by
charging mule deer. One deer even had stomped to death Mr. Weickum’s beloved six-pound Chihuahua,
Cujo.

I wondered why there were so many mule deer in town. It turns out climate change might be to blame.
Rawlins is seeing more deer munching on town grass, as drought overtakes their normal roaming territory.

Even as they continue to question if climate change is real, Mr. Weickum and the residents of Rawlins are
probably seeing signs of a warming planet every time they open their front door to ﬁnd a 200-pound, round-
eared, antlered creature staring back at them.



 



Talk to Dionne on Twitter: @dionnesearcey


Diary from a concert in Tel Aviv

At   the   top   of   Monday’s   episode   on   the   reopening   of   Israeli   society,   we   heard   audio   snippets   of   our
correspondent Isabel Kershner attending a concert in Tel Aviv — her ﬁrst concert in at least a year. Below, she
describes what it was like to re-experience live music, and the return to normalcy in a country where nearly
half its population has been vaccinated:

As the lights were dimmed and the band started to play, a moment of emotion and exhilaration washed over
me. Immersed in live music, the tensions of a whole, bizarre year melted away.

This was what the Israeli government was dubbing “Back to Life”: a country emerging from the coronavirus
pandemic by virtue of its successful, nationwide vaccination campaign after 12 months stalked by infection
and death.

As a fully vaccinated Israeli, I had used my so-called Green Pass, via an app downloaded to my cellphone, for
the ﬁrst time to gain entry to the concert, one of a weekend series organized by the Tel Aviv municipal
authorities.   The   singer   was   Dikla,   a   popular   Israeli   chanteuse   of   Egyptian   and   Iraqi   parentage,   who
performed in Hebrew, English and Arabic.

A spokesman for the municipality said the ﬁrst concerts were sold out within 15 minutes of the tickets going
online.

Still, nothing was quite normal. The concert was taking place in the open air in a soccer stadium that seats
nearly 30,000, but the audience was limited to 500. The surrounding streets were deserted, save for one
small, Parisian-style cafe, with lights burning and tables out on the sidewalk. There was plenty of parking.

Alternating seats in one section of the stands had been sold, to allow for social distancing. The audience was
warned not to make their way down and gather in front of the small stage. They danced by their seats and
sang along through their masks.

By mid-March, more than four million Israeli citizens had been fully vaccinated and were eligible for a Green
Pass, out of a total population of nine million. But some two million people younger than 16 could not yet get
vaccinated, and another million or so Israelis, among them many ultra-Orthodox Jews and Arab citizens, had
so far chosen not to.

An already divided society was being further divided between the vaccinated and the unvaccinated, and the
two-tier system has raised some complicated legal, moral and ethical questions.

Still,   having   a   Green   Pass   at   my   ﬁngertips   is   a   privilege.   After   bitter   wrangling   over   obligations   and
responsibilities, Israel’s Palestinian neighbors are, for the most part, just beginning to get vaccinated. My
mother in England is patiently awaiting her second shot.

But for a transcendental hour or so, the music drowned out the background noise.

Talk to Isabel on Twitter: @IKershner

The Return of Still Processing

Still Processing is back for its spring season! On the ﬁrst episode, the hosts, Jenna Wortham and Wesley
Morris, two culture writers for The Times, confront one of the most offensive words in the English language:
the N-word.

“What happens when I, as a Black person, am in an environment where I don’t want to hear that word?”
Wesley asks in the opening of the episode.

As much as they’d like to escape hearing the N-word, Wesley and Jenna talk about how it surfaces over and
over in their lives: in an exercise class, on public transportation, in gatherings of friends and in childhood
memories. The word is “so much bigger than one instance, one mistake, one rap lyric,” Jenna says. “It really
enters your life even before you get a chance to ﬁgure out how you want to live your life.”

Wesley   and   Jenna   remind   us   that   any   use   of   the   N-word   conjures   its   violent   beginnings   as   a   tool   of
oppression. But in this episode they also discover the “impossible beauty” — yes, beauty — of it.



Listen to the season premiere, and tune every Thursday for new episodes.

 



On The Daily this week


Monday: How Israel is managing to return to normalcy and the legal and ethical questions that its decisions
have raised.

Tuesday: Many in Wyoming consider the coal industry to be part of their identity. So why are some local
lawmakers embracing wind farms?

Wednesday: A look at the shifting political and economic arguments surrounding a federal $15 minimum
hourly wage in the U.S.

Thursday: Why it’s proving difﬁcult to reckon with growing violence against Asian-Americans.

Friday: How Gov. Andrew Cuomo’s bullish political style both facilitated his rise and could bring about his fall.

That’s it for The Daily newsletter. See you next week.

Have thoughts about the show? Tell us what you think at thedaily@nytimes.com ().

Were you forwarded this newsletter? Subscribe here to get it delivered to your inbox.

Love podcasts? Join The New York Times Podcast Club on Facebook.




 


