

The New York Times (web site)
Wednesday, February 24, 2021 -  406 mots

By talking about ‘climate change’ but not ‘illegal aliens,’ the
Biden administration is changing the language of
government.

By Michael D. Shear

Days after President Biden took ofﬁce, the Bureau of Land Management put a scenic landscape of a winding
river at the top of its website, which during the previous administration had featured a photograph of a huge
wall of coal.

At the Department of Homeland Security, the phrase “illegal alien” is being replaced with “noncitizen.” The
Interior Department now makes sure that mentions of its stakeholders include “Tribal” people (with a capital
“T” as preferred by Native Americans, it said). The most unpopular two words in the Trump lexicon — “climate
change”   —   are   once   again   appearing   on   government   websites   and   in   documents;   ofﬁcials   at   the
Environmental Protection Agency have even begun using the hashtag #climatecrisis on Twitter.

And across the government, L.G.B.T.Q. references are popping up everywhere. Visitors to the White House
website are now asked whether they want to provide their pronouns when they ﬁll out a contact form:
she/her, he/him or they/them.

It is all part of a concerted effort by the Biden administration to rebrand the government after four years of
President Donald J. Trump, in part by stripping away the language and imagery that represented his anti-
immigration, anti-science and anti-gay rights policies and replacing them with words and pictures that are
more inclusive and better match the current president’s sensibilities.

“Biden is trying to reclaim the vision of America that was there during the Obama administration, a vision
that was much more diverse, much more religiously tolerant, much more tolerant of different kinds of
gender dispositions and gender presentations,” said Norma Mendoza-Denton, a professor of anthropology at
the   University   of   California,   Los   Angeles,   and   an   author   of   “Language   in   the   Trump   Era:   Scandals   and
Emergencies.”

Ms. Mendoza-Denton said Mr. Trump sought to “remake reality through language” during a tumultuous
tenure.

Now,   ofﬁcials   in   Mr.   Biden’s   administration   are   using   Mr.   Trump’s   own   tactics   to   erase   the   words   his
predecessor used and return to ones that had been banished.

“The president has been clear to all of us — words matter, tone matters and civility matters,” said Jen Psaki,
the White House press secretary. “And bringing the country together, getting back our seat at the global
table means turning the page from the actions but also the divisive and far too often xenophobic language
of the last administration.”



