 News, Tuesday, November 16, 2021 644 mots, p. 2  Cop26 goals already under threat  US and Australia, two of world's largest emitters, fail to set new climate targets by next year By Olivia Rudgard environment correspondent  THE Cop26 deal faltered within 48 hours as the US and Australia, two of the world's largest emitters, suggested that they would not set new climate targets next year.  A key clause in the Glasgow Climate Pact asks countries to set out fresh plans to cut emissions between now and 2030 by the end of 2022, in an effort to push more ambitious action over the next decade, seen as crucial to stem the most dangerous effects of global warming.  A joint statement released by Australia's foreign and emissions reduction ministers on Sunday read: "Australia's 2030 target is fixed and we are committed to meeting and beating it, as we did with our Kyoto-era targets."  Australia has come under fire for failing to set ambitious climate targets, with its aims barely updated ahead of this year's conference. The country is still heavily reliant on coal.  Appearing on ABC talk show Insiders, Greg Hunt, Australia's health minister, also hinted that the country might not make its aims more ambitious.  "We've set our target. But what we'll continue to do is update our projec tions," he said. The country's plan involves cutting emissions by 26 to 28 per cent compared with 2005.  The pact also states that global emissions need to fall by 45 per cent by 2030 compared with 2010 levels in order to limit global warming to 1.5C. During the  Cop26 process, other countries also suggested that they might not update their plans, including New Zealand, whose climate minister said during the talks that just because they had been asked to strengthen them "it doesn't mean you have to", prompting criticism from environmental groups.  The US cited language in the agreement that "requests" parties update their plans "as necessary" and "taking into account different national circumstances". John Kerry, the US climate envoy, said that the country's existing climate plans fulfilled the requirements in the Paris Agreement to limit temperature rises to below 2C and make efforts towards limiting them to 1.5C.  Hours after the agreement was finalised on Saturday, Mr Kerry said: "The language is 'necessary', I don't expect it's going to be necessary, because our ambitious goal is 50 to 52 per cent [emissions cuts] and that's stretching the limits right now. We need to see what's doable."  Yesterday in the House of Commons Boris Johnson also suggested that the UK would not update its targets.  'The UK is already compliant with 1.5 as a result of pledges made by 2030 and 2035', so if we can deliver on those we believe we will be able to restrain our emissions," the Prime Minister said.  The Glasgow Pact was also hailed for mentioning a phaseout of fossil fuel subsidies and a "phase-down" of coal for the first time in a UN pact, though the coal language was watered down at the last moment following an intervention by India and China.  Richard Black, senior associate at the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit, a think tank, said he thought it was also "very unlikely" that the EU would update its pledges. "Their priority should be to get stuff done that they've pledged already," he said.  "China very unlikely, I think, given the geopolitics. India very unlikely. They'll feel they've made their contribution here. I think the opportunity lies in some other countries," he added, naming South Africa and Brazil.  During the conference South Africa secured US, UK and EU funding to help it transition away from coal, and Brazil and Australia have elections next year in which challengers may make more ambitious climate pledges as part of their pitch to voters, he said.  'The UK is already compliant with 1.5 as a result of pledges made by 2030 and 2035' 