 News, Monday, November 8, 2021 1096 mots, p. 16  It's wrong to take the politics out of climate change. We must debate it  We ought to be engaged in how we can respond to the challenge - and not rush towards hasty solutions NICK TIMOTHY  Climate-change policies have been officially designated above politics. The Royal family make their views known. Television news will "nudge" viewers into changing behaviour. Policy is driven by the Climate Change Committee, with little challenge or scrutiny from the Government or Parliament.  That climate change is real, and is caused by human activity, is not disputed by anybody credible and does not need to be subject to political debate. But the same cannot be said for what we must do about it. Answering the question of what to do - which requires us to address issues of geopolitics, complex science, new technologies, economic geography, the distribution of costs and social fairness - is intensely political.  Our response depends on fundamental judgments about human ingenuity and competing values and interests.  And before we answer, we need calm, rational debate about what climate change entails. Some activists, for example, tell us it heralds a real risk of human extinction, yet many of those same activists also insist that we must not countenance solutions - such as the wider adoption of nuclear power - which would help to save us from the fate they fear.  And we are told that the effects of climate change will be catastrophic. Actors and celebrities insist that we need to save the world itself. The Archbishop of Canterbury says that if world leaders fail to reach agreement at Cop26, they will be worse than the politicians who appeased Adolf Hitler. Terrified primary-school children are informed about the imminence of devastation and death, and the responsibility of their parents' generation to stop it.  In fact, we do not know exactly how climate change will change our world. To take one example, we do not know how so-called feedbacks will work. As ice melts, for instance, the world will heat up faster, further reducing the remaining ice, contributing to more global warming.  Some suggest that other feedbacks might in fact limit the pace of climate change. But all we know at this stage is that the effects of feedbacks are a known unknown and that they present a serious risk.  Many of the predictions made by politicians, public figures and the media come from a model produced by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, "RCP 8.5", which was based on a worst-case scenario in 2014 that assumed there would be no climate policies to reduce carbon emissions.  The scenario was perceived to be unrealistic when the model was first produced, and is all the more unrealistic now, with technologies changing - from renewable energy to electric vehicles - and prices falling.  To demonstrate the absurdity of believing that RCP 8.5 reflects "business as usual", the science writer Tom Chivers explains that for emissions to reach the scenario envisaged in the model, global per capita coal use would have to increase by 700 per cent. Yet this is the model that leads the media and politicians to talk in the most catastrophic terms.  So we need rationality and calm, but we also need to be honest that the threat from climate change is real. We know temperatures will rise, and as they do so, we will see more extreme weather events, such as flooding and fires, rising sea levels and the loss of plants and wildlife.  We ought to be engaged in a serious debate about the choices we face in deciding how we respond. What, for example, is the right balance between mitigation, in which we attempt to limit the increase in global temperatures, and adaptation, in which we minimise the negative effects and exploit opportunities?  As Cop26 shows, there is a limit to what the United Kingdom - responsible for 1 per cent of global emissions - can do alone.  We should be debating what we believe we can do unilaterally, what can be done collectively with other Western countries, and what must be done globally. We talk about China - absent from Cop26 - and India - promising to get to net zero by 2070 - but in Germany, coal generates 24 per cent of electricity, and a new coal plant opened last year. Six of the 10 biggest carbon emitters in Europe are German power stations.  We should be debating the speed of our actions, too. Do we have to rush into policies early - especially when other countries will not do so - and accept a lower quality of life and a higher cost of living? Or are we able to give new technologies - such as battery storage and green hydrogen - the time to reduce the cost of cutting our emissions?  And whatever path we choose, who is going to take the pain? The earlier we move, the greater the cost of the changes and the less reliable the alternatives to the things we use and do now will be. Higher industrial energy costs will hurt communities more reliant on manufacturing jobs than others. Higher domestic energy bills, petrol prices, driving charges, aviation taxes and various other pricing signals will hit lower-income families less able to take the financial hit. The one-off cost of buying electric vehicles, replacing gas boilers or insulating houses will simply be too much for some people.  Some taxpayers - already facing high taxes thanks to the pandemic and long-term demographic change - will be forced to pay up three times: to change their cars, their boilers and their way of life, and through the tax system to both subsidise changes for others and to fund a transition away from carbon in poorer countries.  Few policy programmes are more expensive and far-reaching. Yet anybody who raises these questions risks being written off as a "climatechange denier".  The more ideological green activists do not want climate-change policy to be a political matter, because they want to force the most radical, dramatic and costly change onto the country. But politics is the means by which we reconcile competing values and interests, and give legitimacy to the big calls we make about our future.  We should not want to take the politics out of climate-change policy - we need a serious debate about what to do, and we need to put politics at its very centre.  read more at telegraph.co.uk/ opinion  We need rationality and calm, but we also need to be honest that the threat from climate change is real 