 The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) News, Saturday, November 20, 2021 1509 mots, p. 16  Saturday  Your guide to the wildlife winners and losers of 2021  Gardening A year of changeable weather has seen some species decline - but climate change may have given others a boost, says Kate Bradbury Kate Bradbury  For many of us, the cold, wet spring of 2021 is but a distant, albeit unpleasant, memory. If you're lucky enough to have forgotten, many locations around the UK saw more than twice the average amount of rainfall for the month of May, while Wales experienced its wettest on record. On top of that, the average mean temperature was around 2C lower than normal. We gardeners were stuck indoors, willing temperatures to increase so we could get the season started. It was frustrating, yes, but on the whole we remained unscathed.  Spare a thought, then, for the garden wildlife that lived - and tried to breed - through the freezing deluge. From birds to bees, butterflies and amphibians, the unusually cold spring had a knock-on effect on populations, many of which are already declining.  Most species are emerging from hibernation and/or breeding in spring, and for them the cold, wet conditions wreaked havoc. In my garden, frogs spawned for the first time - exactly on time - but the red mason bees were four weeks later than usual, while the small tortoiseshell and peacock butterflies that usually breed on my allotment disappeared entirely. But did my experiences match those up and down the country? I caught up with data recorders at some of Brit ain's leading conservation charities to find out how wildlife has fared through our changeable year.  BUTTERFLIES & MOTHS It's been a mixed year for lepidoptera. Butterfly Conservation's Big Butterfly Count was published last month, con- firming long-term declines in many species. Overall, the number of butterflies recorded per count was at the lowest it has been since the citizen survey began 12 years ago. This is despite more than 150,000 counts taking place - the highest number in the survey's history.  "This year's results show that the average number of butterflies and moths per count is the lowest we've recorded so far," says Dr Zoë Randle, senior surveys officer at Butterfly Conservation. "On average people counted nine butterflies or moths per count, which is down from 11 in 2020, and down again from 16 in 2019. More counts are undertaken and submitted year on year, but it seems that there are fewer butterflies and moths around to be counted."  "Many species were hit by the very wet May," explains Butterfly Conservation's associate director of recording and research, Richard Fox. "Two species that suffered particularly badly were the green-veined white and holly blue butterflies," he continues. "Both of these species are double-brooded and will have been mating (or trying to) during the month-long deluge."  Other species that fared badly in 2021 include the small tortoiseshell, which has been in steady decline for many years. Interestingly, Fox notes there is anecdotal evidence pointing to the small tortoiseshell doing better in northern parts of the UK, compared with the south. "It's something we need to look at but, from personal observations, there are many more small tor toiseshells up north than down south." This could be a climate change response, he suggests.  Conversely, the red admiral and small copper butterflies have had a reasonably good year, while the peacock butterfly looks like it's now having a second brood in the south. "Again, this is in response to climate change," says Fox.  Butterflies' less colourful cousins - moths - typically aren't faring well, but a few species are bucking the trend. "The Clifden nonpareil had a spectacular autumn," says Fox. This moth, with a wingspan of nearly five inches, was last recorded in 1964 and declared extinct some time after. But it's been back in the UK since the mid 2000s. "It's now widespread, from Kent to Cornwall and up into the Midlands," explains Fox. "It's a spectacular moth, huge and with a bright blue underwing. Seeing one is a really memorable experience." Fox suggests setting moth traps in September in gardens near their poplar tree foodplants, for a good chance of seeing one.  While the garden tiger continues to decline, the Jersey tiger expands. Originally found only in south Devon, it's now spreading into Dorset, Sussex, Kent and South Wales, and is "going mad in London". The similar-looking scarlet tiger moth is also expanding out from the West Country, says Fox. Look for its caterpillars on comfrey, lungwort and green alkanet.  BUMBLEBEES The Bumblebee Conservation Trust won't announce findings from its 2021 BeeWalk data until next Easter. But science manager Richard Comont told me the earlier species, particularly the early bumblebee, Bombus pratorum, "really seemed to suffer from the abysmal spring weather".  By contrast, he says, the later species (which emerge from hibernation in June) look like they've fared quite well: "The fairly damp but warm summer kept flowers around for longer than normal, and so we saw very high numbers of some species, including England's most endangered bumblebee, the shrill carder, on the Gwent Levels and other Welsh areas, including Cas tlemartin and Kenfig, plus it was recorded in areas where it hasn't been seen for decades.  "Another late-flying species, the broken-belted bumblebee, Bombus soroeensis, was found in a new area of Wales, while very good numbers were recorded on Salisbury Plain at the end of September, helped by the warm endsummer period."  AMPHIBIANS The chaotic weather affected our frogs, toads and newts, too: "We received so many enquiries about a lack of frog spawn and frogs this spring," says Froglife's chief executive officer, Kathy Wormald. "And then we had lots of reports of amphibians spawning in late summer."  ALAMY  It seems, says Wormald, that weather changes are affecting the behaviour of our amphibians to the point where they don't know what season it is. "Just last month someone emailed us with reports of a frog spawning in their garden. Of course, tadpoles in ponds now will likely not survive winter."  IMAGES;  GETTY  DRAGONFLIES It's been a good year for dragonflies. The State of Dragonflies in Britain and Ireland 2021 report shows that most dragonflies are bucking the trend of declining species in Britain and Ireland, largely due to climate change. Around 40 per cent of resident and migrant species have increased since 1970, while only 11 per cent have declined.  "Emperor dragonflies have increased the most," says co-author of the report, Dave Smallshire, "with many moving north and west." He notes also the southern hawker, which "used to live up to its name" is now found in Scotland, while the broad-bodied chaser is now common in gardens.  "You need only dig a hole and fill it with water, and the broad-bodied chaser will turn up," he says. Con versely, the blue-tailed damselfly is in decline. "We need to do more research but it could be neonicotinoid pesti cides running off farmland and into streams and rivers," says Smallshire.  BIRD LIFE For birds, the picture has been variable. Richard Broughton, ecologist and ornithologist at the UK Centre for Ecology & Hydrology, tells me blue tits and great tits suffered due to the cold spring, as there were fewer caterpillars to feed their chicks.  "Many broods were abandoned or died due to a lack of food," he says. It was worse for willow and marsh tits: "In our Wigan study, more than 80 per cent of willow tit nests were lost due to blue tits stealing nest holes and woodpeckers eating chicks." At another site, he notes marsh tits have had their worst year ever, in a 20-year study.  However, tawny owls and kestrels have had a good year, as has "anything that eats voles". Broughton notes that both bank and field voles have had an excellent year, with their predators reaping the benefits. "There are lots of juvenile tawny owls out at the moment," says Broughton, "while our kestrel nest cam shows a brood of five chicks - their best year yet, with the chicks largely being fed voles."  HOW TO HELP STRUGGLING WILDLIFE As temperatures fall, ensure there's enough food to see species - particularly birds - through winter. Leave windfall apples for migrant birds arriving in the UK now, and plant berry-bearing trees like hawthorn and rowan for future autumn sustenance ? Birds tend to leave ivy berries until last, when they need it most. Ivy berries are extremely high in nutrients and calories, so avoid cutting back ivy until spring in order that birds can get into good shape for breeding ? Leave compost heaps and long grass intact, so that hibernating wildlife such as insects and amphibians can remain safe and undisturbed throughout winter. ? Plant nectar-rich bulbs such as crocus and alliums, so queen bumblebees have a good source of food when they emerge from hibernation in spring. Choose organically grown bulbs, as many commercial bulbs are drenched in bee-killing neonicotinoid pesticides  EMPEROR DRAGONFLY  A GOOD YEAR FOR?  'The average number of butterflies and moths per count is the lowest we've recorded so far' 