OXFAM AMERICA ANNUAL REPORT 20 DEAR FRIENDS, This has been a year marked by disruption and change--armed conflicts, rising levels of inequality in the US and around the world, increased political and social unrest, environmental degradation, and the alarming and devastating spread of COVID-19. It has been a dizzying period of uncertainty. What hasn't changed is your extraordinary support of Oxfam and the people we work with around the world. For that we are extremely grateful. Your commitment has helped Oxfam and our partners deliver lifesaving aid to communities hit by cyclones in southern Africa and south Asia, refugees fleeing Syria and Myanmar, and families experiencing painful and prolonged drought in the Horn of Africa. Your partnership sustains our critical long-term work, such as our groundbreaking initiative to increase the food security of farmers in Ethiopia who are suffering the impacts of climate change, and our decades-long programs in Central America that promote gender and economic equality. You also raised your voices as we challenged presidential candidates to address the factors widening inequality in the US and around the world, encouraged people to vote, and stood up for workers in US and global supermarket supply chains--securing commitments from Amazon and Whole Foods to improve their human rights policies and practices. And you've been by our side as we responded to the spread of COVID-19 across the US and around the world. In the first six months of the pandemic, you helped us support 400 local partners in 66 countries with livelihood assistance, cash distributions, improved access to water and hygiene supplies, and tools and materials to prevent gender-based violence, in addition to helping us advocate for the health and safety of essential workers. COVID-19 doesn't impact people equally. Those with fewer resources to prevent, manage, and treat the virus are unable to overcome it. Oxfam aims to confront the impacts of this crisis, while also fighting to change the systems that make those impacts so much worse for vulnerable people. That means addressing the economic, political, and social marginalization of people based on sex, gender identity, race, nationality, and class. Addressing this systemic inequality is the focus of Oxfam America's new 2030 organizational strategy. In this next decade, we will fight inequality by putting people who experience marginalization--particularly women and girls--at the center of our work. We will support those who represent and are fighting for the rights of marginalized populations, and who are working to limit the outsized influence of the privileged few. We will protect and expand civil society space, joining with others to assure that rights are upheld, respected, and defended. We will redouble our efforts to advance gender justice and maintain our commitment to apply feminist principles throughout our work--including in how we work. Our 2030 strategy also highlights Oxfam's commitment to advancing racial justice and becoming an anti-racist organization. We will continue to dismantle practices and behaviors that perpetuate injustice and exclusion within our organization and beyond. Four explicit commitments will guide this work: (1) Oxfam's leadership and governance will embody and   value diversity; (2) Oxfam's culture will include mechanisms for staff of all backgrounds at all levels to have voice and agency; (3) Oxfam will invest in and support partners and allies focused on racial justice; and (4) Oxfam will leverage its brand to highlight racial justice. The year 2020 marks 50 years since Oxfam America's founding. Fifty years of growth, progress, and impact. Fifty years of knowledge and research--building on our successes, evolving as we grow, and joining with partners and allies as we fight for a more inclusive and just future. And after these 50 years, we are proud of the change we've supported while galvanized to fight even harder. We're inspired by our partner organizations around the world who advocate for and support their communities. And we're inspired by you, our supporters, who have continued to engage with this vital work even as you face a global pandemic that touches us all. We look forward to 50 more years of progress and impact, together--starting with our 10-year strategy--as we forge ahead knowing the fight against inequality is more urgent than ever.  ABBY MAXMAN PRESIDENT & CEO  SMITA SINGH CHAIR, BOARD OF DIRECTORS  FEMINIST PRINCIPLES AT OXFAM AMERICA We are deeply committed to practicing the feminist principles of diversity, inclusion, accountability, and power sharing--and to addressing structural inequities--throughout our work. These principles and commitment require us to reflect critically on how power and patriarchy are embedded in our actions and organizational culture, and in the systems that create and reproduce inequality, injustices, and oppression in the world. These principles are rooted in an intersectional understanding of power and gender justice. Informed by feminist movements, these principles were released by Oxfam International in early 2019 and then adapted by Oxfam America. They informed our 10-year strategy development process and are being integrated into Oxfam America's culture and ways of working across the organization.    Your support helped Oxfam's local partners slow the spread of the disease, secure the rights of the vulnerable, and advocate for structural change during the worst health and economic crisis in a century.  WHEN COVID-19 WAS DECLARED A GLOBAL PANDEMIC AND SPREAD SWIFTLY IN THE US AND AROUND THE WORLD, we quickly saw how it would harshly exploit an unequal world--and in fact deepen disparities around poverty, gender, race, and wealth. In March, Oxfam began mobilizing a global response that put our more than 400 local partners and these systemic inequalities at its center--reaching more than four million people in 66 countries over the first five months of the crisis. Guided by our decades of experience in water, sanitation, and hygiene promotion--and applying what we learned from our rapid responses to the Ebola outbreak in West Africa, cholera outbreaks in Yemen and South Sudan, and the Zika outbreak in the Americas--we distributed personal hygiene kits in 35 countries, built hand-washing stations in 45 countries, and made improving water quantity and quality a priority to stop the spread of COVID-19. As the threat of COVID-19 increased in Kenya, for example, we began working with the Sheepcare Community Center and Nairobi's water utility company to help tens of thousands of people living in informal settlements. The goal: access water through existing "water ATMs"--distribution points where residents fill a container and pay for the water electronically. Oxfam was the first organization to respond in the settlements inside a country where 80 percent of the population works in the informal economy. "Local partners are at the center of our humanitarian work in every way," said Irene Gai, Oxfam water and sanitation strategist in Kenya. "They have strong relationships with local leaders, and they understand community dynamics, which means they have an essential role to play in developing programs that will work." Also in Nairobi, Oxfam partner Mukuri Youth Initiative helped people access electronic vouchers to buy soap from struggling local shops--an innovative, market-based solution to the unfolding crisis. The initiative also painted murals with public health messages and worked with musicians to create a rap song and video about COVID-19 prevention that reached 600,000 listeners through community radio.  SECURING THE RIGHTS OF THE VULNERABLE  The spread and impact of the coronavirus also threatens to  trigger an unprecedented global hunger crisis. Indeed, a report  we published in July found that 12,000 people could die every  day from hunger linked to the disease by the end of the year--the  final straw for millions of food producers and workers marginalized  by conflict, climate change, and a broken food system. And as  more people stayed home without formal employment, the UN  warned of another kind of fallout that would disproportionately  affect women: a potential one-third reduction in progress  toward ending gender-based violence, including intra-household  abuse. In response, Oxfam's partnerships with women's rights and feminist organizations helped confront these intersecting  REBUILDING OUR ECONOMIES AND SOCIETIES  realities to save lives and offered care and comfort. We pro-  The truths about our inequality crisis have been laid bare: The vided food and cash assistance as well as social protection  disproportionate burden of parenting and care expected of  services--including food baskets, psychological support for  women and mothers. Countries like Ghana spending 11 times  migrants and their host communities, and COVID-19 protection more on debt repayments than on public health expenditures.  and personal hygiene kits--to people in 26 countries.  Essential workers in grocery stores and poultry plants in the US  In Colombia, Oxfam partner and feminist organization Fundacion Mujer y Futuro focused on how women and young girls  having to demand from their corporate employers the right to a safe workplace.  at the Venezuelan-Colombian border were affected by the  Now, the foundations of our economy and society are being  COVID-19 lockdown. Documenting rising gender-based vio-  rebuilt--and Oxfam is calling for an irreversible shift toward a lence and a lack of access to food, shelter, and employment  sustainable, more equal, and humane economy. We demand an  opportunities among Venezuelan migrants, the organization  economy in which governments and corporations work for all of  responded by supporting 19,000 Colombian and Venezuelan  us--not only the fortunate few.  women and their families with hygiene kits, food baskets, welcome spaces for migrants, and trainings on human rights and protection strategies for women.  In May, Oxfam joined more than 1,600 networks, organizations, and individuals from more than 100 countries calling for a feminist recovery to the COVID-19 crisis. Prioritizing the needs  "This process of knowledge sharing with Oxfam around  of the most vulnerable including refugees and indigenous peo-humanitarian response has helped us today become a leading ples, we called on governments and multilateral institutions  organization in the humanitarian field with a focus on gender  to invest billions in economic stimulus, cancel all external  in the country," said Johanna Durán, director of Fundación  debt payments for poor countries due to be made this year,  Mujer y Futuro.  and make all COVID-19 vaccines and treatments a global public  good--free and accessible to all.  Over the past 11 years, thousands of farmers have increased their yields, diversified their crops, and secured access to loans and insurance thanks to the R4 Initiative. Now the project moves into its second decade, without Oxfam--by design.  MILLIONS OF SMALL-SCALE FARMERS LIVE IN ENVIRONMENTALLY VULNERABLE PARTS OF THE WORLD, subject to the daily effects of a changing climate and unpredictable rainfall. Helping communities manage the accompanying risks is challenging--but doable, as Oxfam and its partners have proven in an innovative program called the R4 Rural Resilience Initiative. Starting first in Ethiopia, over the past 11 years Oxfam and its partners provided farmers in this program with insurance for crops; developed community projects to help improve soil quality; implemented savings programs; and facilitated access to loans. Oxfam and the World Food Programme (WFP) later expanded the R4 Initiative to Senegal, and over recent years, WFP brought the initiative to Malawi, Zambia, Kenya, Zimbabwe, and Burkina Faso. The original pilot began in Ethiopia with 200 farmers, and by 2019, the program involved 93,000 farmers--55 percent of whom are women. The R4 Initiative is benefiting more than half a million people. ZimamGermay is one. This single mother of seven boys in northern Ethiopia joined R4 in 2011 and has been paying for insurance for her wheat crop. She also benefited from training that helped her diversify what she plants in her garden, and she obtained a 300-liter tank that harvests water from the roof of her small home. When filled in the rainy season, the tank can support her drinking and irrigation needs for six months. She is also saving money. "My life really restarted with this project," Germay said. Until R4, most development groups were skeptical about microinsurance for small-scale farmers. But this initiative collaborated with the private sector and researchers to use high-tech satellite imagery to track rainfall patterns, triggering insurance payments to help farmers manage losses and recover faster from drought. In 2019, the program marked an important milestone, as--by design--Oxfam America began the process of handing over daily management to country teams and the WFP. These plans also align with Oxfam's global effort to decentralize its work and move toward country-led programming.  Our staff and partners held a workshop in Ethiopia to document the initiative's history and celebrate its accomplishments, and we are developing a global report that summarizes and analyzes what we learned and achieved over the 11 years, to be published in 2020. R4 can now move into its second decade under the guidance of country teams and their partners, which are influencing governments to support R4 to improve the ability of poor communities to adapt to, and survive, climate change.    Transforming the global humanitarian system means shifting power to local leaders--and seeing a far greater impact.  WHEN DISASTER STRIKES, PARACHUTING IN WITH AID IS A GOOD IDEA--AS A LAST RESORT. In fact, it represents a failure to invest in the local organizations and authorities that are best suited to this work. For years, Oxfam has been an advocate for local leadership in emergencies; the coronavirus pandemic is hammering our message home, because now keeping it local is in many cases the only good option. In Bangladesh, for example, moving between districts entails long quarantine delays. That hasn't held up Oxfam's response, because we are supporting local partner organizations that are actively working on the pandemic across the country. Some are spreading key public health messages; others are distributing cash, food, and hygiene materials; others are supporting food banks. When the powerful Cyclone Amphan struck the country in the midst of the crisis, Oxfam's partner Shushilan was already on the ground in the key communities, ready to respond to the double disaster with food, water, and cash. "Cyclone Amphan salinated the water supplies," says Director Mostafa Nuruzzaman. "Shushilan was able to start distributing drinking water within a day of the storm." The situation was so dire that Nuruzzaman is sure that some of the poorest and most vulnerable people would not have survived without immediate assistance. The key to the success of Oxfam's responses to COVID-19 and the disasters that have followed is strong partnerships. Bangladeshi organizations such as Shushilan bring knowledge of languages and cultures to the table, as well as long-term relationships of trust with many of the affected communities; Oxfam brings technical expertise and funding. But together we look beyond the emergency of the moment to a future in which power, resources, and responsibilities increasingly rest with capable domestic organizations like Shushilan. "Oxfam taught us about how to provide access to water and sanitation in emergencies, and how to promote safe hygiene, and now we're in charge of all that for a Rohingya camp of more than 28,000 people," says Nuruzzaman. "Oxfam also helped  us improve our internal financial systems, which means now we are succeeding in getting funding for our programs from a variety of sources. Years ago, we had only a few agencies supporting our work; now we have more than 110." "Under the old model, an agency like Oxfam would have trained and funded us to do a set of limited tasks," Nuruzzaman says. "We could have been dependent on them indefinitely. Now, we are leaders in our country's emergency response network. Oxfam has helped us become the organization we envisioned for ourselves." ABOVE: Niyoti, 35, displays the food she her family were able to store for their household of seven. Without Shushilan's food and water distributions, she says the family would have fallen sick. Fabeha Monir/Oxfam OPPOSITE: Renuka, 35, uses a hand-washing station provided by Oxfam partner Shushilan. "We are trying hard to protect ourselves from the coronavirus," she says. "Without this hand-washing facility, it would be difficult for us to stay clean." Fabeha Monir/Oxfam    THANKS FOR BEING PART OF OUR OXFAMILY We're grateful to you, our supporters, for giving so generously of your time and resources-- especially in this period of uncertainty. Your partnership inspires, energizes, and sustains us. Here are three members of our community we'd like you to meet. As a monthly donor, I can't fund a project by myself, but what I can donate makes a significant difference when combined with what others are donating. Pat Hackbarth OXFAM AMERICA MONTHLY DONOR Pat Hackbarth and Oxfam go back nearly 40 years. "When you have a relationship with an organization for so many years, you get to think of it as part of your family," she says. Over the years she has been a donor, Hackbarth says she's witnessed a lot of change at Oxfam. She recalls being drawn to the organization in its early days when we were focused on smaller-scale projects in villages and farming communities. From the beginning, Hackbarth saw that her steady gift was contributing to real impact. "It was possible for people whose lives are comfortable to make life better for people who live perpetually on the edge," she says. As Oxfam grew and our work became more focused on transforming unjust systems and structures, her commitment deepened. In the face of COVID-19, she says it's more important than ever to support people who are struggling against the worst impacts of the pandemic. "It seems to me that there are such enormous problems in the world right now, and the problems that we have right now are so universal, they encompass the globe," she says. "If there was ever a time to help out, and not just in your own neighborhood, it's now."   Oxfam has been able to challenge the status quo in a powerful way and take risks. I always appreciated and admired Oxfam for that--for doing something that others were not. Sherine Jayawickrama OXFAM AMERICA BOARD OF DIRECTORS, DONOR Sherine Jayawickrama may be new to Oxfam's board, serving as director since October 2019, but working with Oxfam is old hat for her. With a background in international development, she has long been engaged with us as a donor as well as through her research on organizational effectiveness. "I got to know Oxfam as an organization that did really strong policy work," she says. "Oxfam America to me has always had a distinctive role because the organization doesn't accept US government funds, which gives it the space and latitude to challenge and speak up about policies and positions of the US government that are harmful. "It's a strategic investment to give to Oxfam America. It has an impact domestically, internationally, and across this range of issues related to equality, justice, fairness, and the future. In my mind, I'm investing strategically in underlying leverage points to secure big things like a fair economy or climate solutions." I want any money I give to be `life or death,' and I want it to be as efficient as possible. Oxfam is an effective, meaningful charity. I have always felt really good about donating to Oxfam, and never more so than right now. Elys Roberts OXFAM AMERICA AND OXFAM GREAT BRITAIN DONOR Elys Roberts started donating to Oxfam as a student at England's University of Manchester in the 1990s. "I wanted a charity where my money would have an impact and could save a life," he says. More than 20 years later--after moving to the US, starting a family, and founding BEESY, a behavioral science­based market research company--Oxfam is still on his mind. Roberts has a long-term vision for fighting poverty. After launching BEESY in 2018, he wanted to donate a percentage of its profits to Oxfam, with the idea that, as BEESY grows, the amount he gives to Oxfam will grow. If it ever comes time to sell BEESY, he plans to donate a portion of that money to Oxfam. Roberts is also instilling in his employees an appreciation for the power of philanthropy. This summer, he gave his staff an additional 1 percent pay increase specifically to donate to Oxfam; they can opt out, but so far, none have. "I liked the idea of getting people--especially younger employees--in the habit of giving, so hopefully there is an exponential effect. Not only does that 1 percent amount to more as their compensation grows over time, but they start to think about how they can do more to save lives."   FINANCIAL INFORMATION (April 1, 2019, to March 31, 2020) Oxfam America ended fiscal year 2020 in a solid financial position despite the COVID-19 pandemic, which hit the world during our fourth fiscal quarter. Total revenues for the 12 months ending March 31, 2020, were $75.1 million, a decrease of $12.9 million as compared with the prior fiscal year. This decrease was due to COVID-19­related delays on awards in the pipeline at year-end, a $3 million unplanned loss of investment income as compared with the prior year (largely recovered since), as well as revenue from large multiyear grants recognized upon award in fiscal year 2019. Unrestricted contributions remained steady at $49.4 million as compared with the prior year's $48.5 million, and contract income earned in 2020 increased by $3.2 million to $7.7 million as a result of increased humanitarian program delivery in Sudan. Contract income is expected to be substantially lower in fiscal 2021 due to a planned wind down in services in Sudan. Total program expenditures, at $66.6 million, were $1 million less than in fiscal year 2019, and 75 percent of total expenditures in fiscal year 2020. The year-over-year decrease is directly attributable to COVID-19­related disruption that included lockdowns, business interruption, and travel restrictions. Program expenditures were evenly distributed between campaigning for social justice at $21.5 million and programs to overcome poverty and save lives at $20 million and $19.4 million, respectively. Public education expenditures were in line with the prior year at 8 percent of program costs, or $5.6 million. Program activities included work on inequality, food security, aid effectiveness, climate change policy, gender rights enhancement, and constituency building, as well as humanitarian response. Fundraising and support costs increased by 7 percent compared with fiscal year 2019 as we made additional investments in donor acquisition in fiscal year 2020. Personnel vacancies resulted in lower-than-normal fundraising and support costs in fiscal year 2019, making the increase appear higher than our average run rate. We ended the year with $28.7 million in cash and liquid unrestricted investments. This balance is after a planned use of excess unrestricted reserves of $7 million and $2 million less in unrestricted investment income than in fiscal year 2019, due to depressed market values at March 31, 2020. N. JAMES SHACHOY TREASURER  