RISING TO
RESILIENCE
A Practical Guide for
Business & Nature
                                                        This report was developed in part thanks to a deep and long-standing
                                                           relationship with The Coca-Cola Company, whose willingness and
                                                   resources helped WWF pilot our resilience strategy with the private sector.

                                                        WWF is one of the world’s leading conservation organizations, working
                                                       in nearly 100 countries for over half a century to help people and nature
                                                   thrive. With the support of more than 5 million members worldwide, WWF
                                                    is dedicated to delivering science-based solutions to preserve the diversity
                                                      and abundance of life on Earth, halt the degradation of the environment
                                                     and combat the climate crisis. Visit www.worldwildlife.org to learn more.


                                                                                                                    Authors
                                                                                                      David Kuhn (WWF-US)
                                                                                                     Shaun Martin (WWF-US)
                                                                                                     Ryan Bartlett (WWF-US)

                                                                                             For more information contact:
                                                                                     David Kuhn, Corporate Resilience Lead
© Jason Houston / WWF-US

                                                                                                   David.Kuhn@wwfus.org
Cover Photo © Vangmuang Phongphailath / WWF-Laos



                                                   1
                                                                           © Day’s Edge / WWF-US
INTRODUCTION
Climate change is amplifying and
creating new risks for companies.
As storms, droughts and heat waves become more frequent
and severe, natural systems that provide the essential inputs to
sustain production and ensure business continuity face ever-
increasing threats. Companies must now ensure they are not
only sustainable, but also “resilient” -- that is able to withstand,
recover from, and adapt to changes in weather and climate.
Companies can manage climate risks by building resilience in
their supply chains, the communities where they operate, and the
natural systems they rely upon. The purpose of this guidebook is
to help companies understand where they are at risk from climate
change and to begin to develop and refine strategies that build
resilience to rapid, ongoing change by utilizing nature.

Company awareness of the risks climate change poses to value
chains, communities, infrastructure, nature and ultimately
their business has grown significantly in recent years, owed, in
large part, to the fact that climate impacts have become more
quantifiable, dramatic, and costly1. A 2019 State of Green
Business report also notes that consumer demand for action on
climate change is becoming a factor driving a sharp increase in
the awareness of climate risks among companies2. Companies
are seeing the impacts of climate change on their profitability,
sustainability, and reputation.




                                                                       2
                                     In response to increasing climate impacts and demand for action,

   THERE IS AN URGENT NEED           companies are reporting on physical and transitional risks associated
                                     with climate change, and around 80% of those engage in reducing

   FOR CLEAR, AND ACTIONABLE         their emissions. While nearly every large company has significant


   RISK MANAGEMENT GUIDANCE
                                     plans to cut emissions, very few have plans to manage the current
                                     and future climate change risks to their businesses beyond further

   THAT IS GOOD FOR COMPANIES,       investment in business-as-usual sustainability programs.3 Yet
                                     there is an increasing number of incidences of companies failing

   SOCIETY AND THE PLANET            to respond to or mitigate social and environmental risks, from
                                     environmental disasters to social conflicts over resource allocation
                                     and use.4 Companies are often paralyzed by the complexities and
                                     new uncertainties that climate change brings to traditional risk
                                     management. More is required to address the root causes of system
                                     failures and the amplification of risk that climate change will have on
                                     companies and the systems on which they rely.

                                     As companies increasingly turn their attention to addressing
                                     climate risks, there is an urgent need for clear and actionable risk
                                     management guidance that is good for companies, society and the
                                     planet. While companies can report climate-related risk and risk
                                     mitigation to platforms like the Task Force on Climate-related
                                     Financial Disclosures (TCFD), there is no clear guidance on what to
                                     report or how to mitigate risk that aligns resilience and sustainability
                                     options. This lack of alignment is itself a serious risk to companies,
                                     people and nature. It is important for companies to think not only
                                     about the impacts of climate change on their supply chains, but also
                                     the vulnerability of the communities and natural systems on which
                                     we all depend for services and solutions. If companies misinterpret
                                     risk and misalign action to contend with a narrow set of risks or goals,
                                     they may compromise the broader health of the communities and
                                     ecosystems they rely on for profit, productivity, and social license to
                                     operate. The answers are not always simple and require commitment
                                     and time, but developing solutions grounded in the resilience
                                     principles detailed in this guidance can lead to durable benefits.


© Tom Vierus / WWF-US


                                 3
WHAT DOES CLIMATE




                                                                           © Shutterstock / Karl Hofman / WWFes
CHANGE MEAN FOR
COMPANIES?
Companies have been disclosing information on their
environmental, social and governance risks since the late 1990s.
However, two factors have led to companies simply reporting




  1
issues rather than addressing the underlying problems.

         The problems themselves are often
         complex and often outside the direct
         control of companies.




  2      Companies tend to focus on a set of
         narrowly defined risks in isolation
         from one another.


Investment in sustainability as a business practice, defined as the
implementation of a business strategy that focuses on the ethical,
social, environmental, cultural, and economic dimensions of
doing business, can help a company understand the complexity of
the problem.5 Corporate boards of some of the largest companies
in the world are beginning to use sustainability as a measure of
corporate health.6 However, sustainability is no longer a sufficient
measure of health because climate change acts as a risk multiplier
by increasing or exacerbating extremes and stresses, but also by
the inherent uncertainty in its nature. The past is not the future
and companies are now being forced to reassess how they look
at risk as well as how they define sustainability. A sustainability
strategy does not inherently make a company more resilient.



                                                                       4
Impacts of climate change on business
According to one valuation, the value at risk as a result of climate change, to the       Climate change impacts can be categorized as shocks and stresses, or “acute”
total global stock of manageable assets ranges from $4.2 trillion to $43 trillion         and “chronic”, and can be felt throughout the value chain. Acute risks such as
between now and the end of the century. The 2015 study highlights that “much              severe storms, floods, and drought have immediate and apparent impacts on
of the impact on future assets will come through weaker growth and lower asset            corporate operations, supply chains, customers, and communities. Chronic
returns across the board.” Companies may not be able to avoid climate-related             risks, like sea level rise and desertification, are longer-term and will not
risks by shifting value chains as climate change is a systemic issue. Climate
                                                                      7
                                                                                          disappear. TCFD has outlined the financial impacts of climate change for
change affects everything. Companies are being forced to invest in longer-term            business (Figure 1), but there are broader implications from climate change
strategies and solutions at scale. Organizations that invest in activities and            for companies beyond how it manifests in a traditional enterprise risk
strategies that may not be viable in the longer term due to climate risks are thus        management (ERM) report.
less resilient; and their investors will likely experience lower returns.



  Figure 1



                                   RISKS                                                                                  OPPORTUNITIES

                             TRANSITION                                                                                   Resource Efficiency
                             Policy & Legal                                                                                   Energy Source
                             Technology                               STRATEGIC PLANNING                                   Products/Services
                             Market                                    RISK MANAGEMENT                                              Markets
                             Reputation                                                                                           Resilience

                             PHYSICAL
                             Acute
                             Chronic                                      FINANCIAL IMPACT




                           Revenue                                                                                              Assets & Liabilities

                                                           Income            Cash Flow                 Balance
                                                          Statement          Statement                  Sheet
                       Expenditures                                                                                             Capital & Financing


                                                                                 Source

                                                                                      5
                                                                          © WWF / Simon Rawles
Climate change not only directly impacts a company’s operations
and supply chains, but affects a company’s health in other ways.
Climate change impacts economies, communities and workforces
through the spread of tropical diseases like malaria and dengue,
which are moving poleward into new areas, and the appearance of
novel pathogens not just for people but for livestock and wildlife.
Plants become less nutritious, as more carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere can decrease dietary iron, zinc, protein, and other
macro- and micronutrients in certain crops. Lack of available
clean water also has serious implications for human health and
sanitation.

Social license to operate is an essential part of a healthy business
and it too can be affected by climate change. Profits alone do
not create social license. “Without social legitimacy, companies
might find it difficult to access physical inputs and financial capital
as well as obtain permits and other resources to function.” A
company is not only impacted by climate risk within its fence line,
but also by how communities where they operate are impacted
by climate change and how they respond to those impacts. A lack
of awareness of the risks climate change poses to the broader
landscape and communities can result in hitting the “panic” button
when faced with an emergency or overwhelming stressor, and
compromising investments in social legitimacy and environmental
sustainability for immediate sourcing or rebuilding needs.
Furthermore, if companies do not consider how communities
are being impacted by climate change, they cannot plan to meet
societal expectations that give them social license.

Beyond risk to value chains and communities, consumers as well as
                                                                                                          FOR BUSINESS AND
governments are demanding more action. According to the 2019
State of Green Business report, recent years have shown a sharp
                                                                                                        SOCIETY, THE COST OF
increase in the number of companies reporting customer-driven                                        INACTION HAS OUTPACED
risks relating to climate change, led by young people. For business
and society, the cost of inaction has outpaced the cost of action. 8                                     THE COST OF ACTION
                                                                                                 6
© naturepl.com / Andy Rouse / WWF




                                               The Value of Ecosystems:
                                               How should companies value
                                               nature to build resilience?
                                               Ecosystems themselves provide economic benefits and services to society and business.
                                               Ecosystem services, such as pollination of crops, water filtration, flood mitigation, waste
                                               decomposition, carbon sequestration and climate regulation are worth around $125 trillion
                                               dollars annually. A recent paper by WWF, Natural Capital Project, and Global Trade
                                               Analysis Project modeled the value loss of six ecosystem services at US$9.87 trillion in real
                                               GDP by 2050, partly as a result of degradation.9 The degradation of ecosystems is hindering
                                               their ability to provide services and resources, to keep our society and economy healthy. It is
                                               for this reason that so many companies have developed sustainability strategies.

                                               Nature is also humanity’s first line of defense against the impacts of climate change. But
                                               climate change itself poses an immediate and existential threat to ecosystems. This has
                                               direct impacts on our economy and potential to be prepared for changes. The consequences
                                               of climate change and synergistic impacts on the natural world are particularly apparent
                                               in the agricultural sector. Climate change could depress growth in global agriculture yields
                                               up to 30% by 2050.10 And without resilient agriculture, crop failures and food insecurity
                                               will likely lead to increased environmental degradation as companies shift production to
                                               new locations and communities exploit natural resources to accommodate lost livelihoods
                                               and incomes. We are at risk of finding ourselves in a negative feedback loop, where climate
                                               change destroys our means of production and well-being, and in response we further
                                               compromise the very ecosystems that are providing the same.

                                               Climate change affects the entire globe, but its impacts are local and landscape dynamics
                                               are complex. Ecosystems and people do not operate independently; they are parts of an
     ECOSYSTEMS & PEOPLE DO NOT OPERATE        interdependent system, each influencing the health and viability of the other. Companies
                                               and their supply chains are also integral parts of this system. To remain viable in the face
     INDEPENDENTLY; THEY ARE PARTS OF AN       of growing risks and uncertainty, businesses will need to invest in broad, system-wide
     INTERDEPENDENT SYSTEM, EACH INFLUENCING   solutions. Resilience is ultimately a property of systems and an individual company’s
                                               resilience means little if the natural and social systems upon which it depends are disrupted
     THE HEALTH AND VIABILITY OF THE OTHER     or fail. One of the best ways for business to become more resilient is to leverage nature.



                                                          7
Resilience & Companies
WWF broadly defines climate resilience as: the ability of a social-ecological           While climate change amplifies existing risks, and creates new risks and greater
system to absorb and recover from climate-related shocks and disturbances and           uncertainty, lack of a plan, contingencies, and inflexibility exacerbates or creates
maintain functionality and services by adapting to chronic climate stressors,           its own risks as well. Platforms such as the Task Force on Climate-related
and transform when necessary. For business, resilience means the ability to             Financial Disclosures (TCFD) have provided companies with the opportunity to
achieve and maintain long-term goals in the face of shocks and stresses. It is          inform investors and insurers of climate risk with a consistent climate-related
inherently about fostering understanding, responsiveness, learning, flexibility,        financial risk disclosure, opening the door to deeper understanding of climate
and continuous improvement.                                                             risks and financial implications. Companies are developing plans to address
                                                                                        their climate risk and taking action. But how companies take taking action
Resilience means dealing with unidentified risks and considering adapting and
                                                                                        matters.
transforming. But companies can become resilient at the expense of people
and nature, which would only compound risk and impacts. In order to survive             Investment in business as usual sustainability and reducing impact does not
and thrive, companies need to take steps to guard ecosystems and ecosystem              fully help a company face a changing world. Companies now need to embrace
services against degrading human activities as well as climate change.                  change and uncertainty. Being proactive and prepared can, if framed through
Companies can avoid maladaptation and compromising long-term health                     a social-ecological lens, have financial benefits for companies as well as create
and wellness of communities and the environment by framing their risk from              socio-ecological benefits and buffers. Companies are beginning to see the
climate change in a socio-ecological context.                                           opportunities in climate change, from new products to expanding markets to
                                                                                        marketing, and opportunities to do things better. Investments in nature are a
Building resilience is a process that requires attention to complexity and
                                                                                        way to do things better and meet multiple goals. They have proven to be a cost-
consideration of system dynamics. Companies need to understand how they’re
                                                                                        effective and smart way to act. And safeguarding those natural solutions
organized to deal with complexity and uncertainty. They need new strategies to
                                                                                        to the threats of climate change makes good business sense.
address environmental, social, and supply chain turbulence, and to safeguard
investments in sustainability from climate impacts while maximizing return on
investment in sustainability.




    FOR BUSINESS, RESILIENCE MEANS
    THE ABILITY TO ACHIEVE AND
    MAINTAIN LONG-TERM GOALS

                                                            © Martin Harvey / WWF


                                                                                    8
RESILIENCE & SUSTAINABILITY
Sustainability is the practice of reducing environmental impacts to ensure




                                                                                       © Martin Harvey / WWF
balance between natural resource use and replenishment, ultimately
improving the quality of life and the bottom line. It often assumes a
functioning and stable system. Rejecting the use of pesticides in agriculture
because of their harmful effect on pollinators necessary for crop production
can be considered a sustainability strategy. However, in doing so organic
farmers may increase their vulnerability to outbreaks of new pests that are
becoming more frequent with climate change. To protect crops from this
emerging threat one needs a resilience strategy.

Resilience is the practice of anticipating risks and designing strategies
to mitigate those risks to ensure that systems maintain functionality (or
profitability) in the face of destabilizing disruptions and chronic stresses. To
build resilience to pest outbreaks organic farmers may begin planting pest-
resistant strains of crops. They could also switch new entirely new crops or
move production to new areas where the new pests are not yet present. Or
they can begin using pesticides.

Each of these options presents a dilemma. How can farmers (and companies)
continue to pursue sustainability as they build resilience to emerging shocks
and stresses? Pest resistance may come in the form of GMOs. New crops
may require more water resources (and may not be as profitable). Moving to
new areas could mean clearing natural forests and grasslands. And of course,
using pesticides could be abandoning the sustainability strategy altogether.

However, sustainability and resilience can work together. Sustainable
practices can contribute to resilience, if they’re designed with socio-
ecological resilience in mind. To address a broad number of risks and
uncertainty, a company needs to plan to be resilient and sustainable.
Companies committed to pursuing sustainability goals will face the same
sorts of tradeoffs as they seek to build the resilience of their companies in
the face of a rapidly changing climate, and will need to plan to minimize
tradeoffs to achieve their goals.

                                                                                   9
                          WWF’s Principles of Resilience

Avoid Harming Nature                     Use Nature to Help People                   Build Resilience for Nature
Eﬀorts to build corporate resilience     Corporate resilience strategies should      Resilience strategies should not overlook the
should pursue actions that help          consider the important contributions        signiﬁcant risks that climate change poses to
mitigate risk without undermining        that nature provides to people,             nature, nor assume that sustainability eﬀorts
valuable ecosystem services that         communities, and economies in               alone can build resilience to unprecedented
provide important services to            reducing vulnerabilities to the impacts     climate shocks & stresses. Nature itself needs
businesses and communities. In           of climate-related shocks and stresses.     to adapt to climate change. In fact, companies
short, companies should not              Interventions that build upon nature’s      may need to strengthen their sustainability
sacriﬁce their environmental             contributions to societal challenges like   goals to reduce pressure on nature as well as
sustainability goals to build            climate change are called                   support “climate-smart” conservation
resilience to climate-related risks.     Nature-based Solutions.                     interventions to ensure continued delivery of
                                                                                     important services to people and businesses.


EXAMPLE                                  EXAMPLE                                     EXAMPLE
Removing a mangrove forest to build a    Natural wetlands can reduce ﬂood risks      Forests can help stop soil erosion, recharge ground-
seawall to protect coastal assets will   through water retention during periods of   water and store carbon. But these services are lost
result in the loss natural protection    high rainfall.                              when forests burn under increasing drought and
from storm surge and sea level rise,                                                 heat. We must manage forests diﬀerently, some-
loss of carbon storage potential, and                                                times even allowing new species of trees within
habitat for ﬁsh nurseries that may be                                                forests, to help ensure their long-term viability.
important to local communities.




                                                                   10
© Michel Gunther / WWF




                                                                      These principles, which value nature and its contributions to the
                                                                      social-ecological system in which companies operate, can help guide
                                                                      companies as they develop resilience strategies to mitigate risks to
                                                                      their profitability, reputation, social license to operate and to their
                                                                      sustainability goals. As companies think about resilience, there are
                                                                      a few things they should consider.

                                                                      First, is that there are multiple definitions of resilience and all are
                                                                      equally valid. Ecologists, engineers, sociologists, and public health
                                                                      officials each have their own understanding of the concept and
                                                                      apply it to different problems. Resilience is multi-dimensional,
                                                                      depending on one’s vantage point and perspective. Furthermore,
                                                                      building resilience for one group may come at the expense of
                                                                      making others less resilient. A government might dam a river to
                                                                      store water for its citizens in times of drought only to deprive its
                                                                      neighbors downstream of the water resources they need.

                                                                      Companies can be resilient in multiple ways. There are two broad
                                                                      categories of resilience “general” and “specified.” General resilience
                                                                      basically means “healthy.” When someone is healthy, they can
                                                                      withstand and recover from a whole host of non-specific illnesses
                                                                      and injuries. You can build general resilience by eating well,
                                                                      exercising regularly, and avoiding unhealthy habits like smoking.
                                                                      When you get a cold, you should bounce back faster than someone
                                                                      who does not take care of themselves. But being in good overall
                         A GOVERNMENT MIGHT DAM A RIVER TO            health does not mean you are immune to specific diseases like
                                                                      Ebola, for example. For specific threats you need to build “specified
                         STORE WATER FOR ITS CITIZENS IN TIMES        resilience.” Each year we are encouraged to get immunized for new

                         OF DROUGHT ONLY TO DEPRIVE ITS
                                                                      strains of flu. For threats like Ebola, society needs to take special
                                                                      measures to prevent its spread.

                         NEIGHBORS DOWNSTREAM OF THE
                         WATER RESOURCES THEY NEED
                                                                 11
HOW SHOULD COMPANIES
BUILD RESILIENCE?




                                                                                                 © Aaron Gekoski / WWF-US
As the previous section suggests, there are many ways to think about and build resilience
depending on a company’s goals and the context in which it operates. Companies should
build both general and specific resilience. They should invest in actions that build general
resilience as well as specific resilience to identified threats to specific areas through
targeted actions. Investments in resilience means a company is addressing general
threats as well as specific threats brought about by climate change. And companies
should use sustainability as a tool for building resilience. This line of thinking also offers
opportunities. A company’s plan to address risk should involve actions that make business
sense: investing in sustainability can lead to growth in a company’s top and bottom line.

Resilience is a process, not an end goal. You cannot achieve resilience, only strive toward
it. You cannot be resilient to everything all the time. Although quantifying risk and
measuring resilience are challenging, companies can implement checklists and processes
and incentivize solutions that build system resilience and help meet sustainability goals.
To improve risk management and resilience building, companies can do things like use
climate, environmental, and social information in risk screening; and gather information
from landscapes and stakeholders in landscapes where the company operates. Companies
can also develop and implement environmentally-conscious disaster risk management
policies and practices. Extending time horizons in planning can help ensure the right
kind of responsiveness and flexibility of businesses in landscapes. Encouraging and
incentivizing the appropriate use of “nature-based solutions,” such as wetlands and
forests, can help reduce the impacts of floods and recharge aquifers. And companies
should rethink how natural resource management must account for the impact of climatic
change on nature and recognize that nature itself is affected, by using climate information
in planning nature-based solutions and incorporating scenario planning.

WWF has developed a four step process to help companies identify key climate-related
risks and develop solutions that help build resilience while valuing and supporting nature.



                                                                                     12
WWF’S FOUR STEP PROCESS                     STEP 01
                                Assess Risk: Assembling Available
                                Knowledge & Resources, Planning
                                   for Change, & Developing a
                                Long-Term Capacity for Informed,
                                      Flexible Management




                                            STEP 02
                                     Develop a strategy to
                                    manage for change, not
                                       just persistence




                                            STEP 03
                                   Implement local solutions
                                    that are nature-friendly,
                                    responsive, and ﬂexible




                                            STEP 04
                                     Monitor, evaluate, and
                                      adaptively manage



© Aaron Gekoski / WWF-US



                           13
     1                  ASSESS RISK: Assembling Available Knowledge & Resources, Planning for
                        Change, & Developing a Long-Term Capacity for Informed, Flexible Management
The first step to better managing the growing climate risks that a business
                                                                                          Figure 3


faces is understanding those risks. The Task Force on Climate-related                                                                       Total freshwater withdrawn (cubic
                                                                                                                Water Usage    Physical
Financial Disclosures (TCFD) has opened the door to better understanding of                                                                 meters)

climate risks and financial implications. But guidance is needed to assess the
                                                                                                                                            Amount used per output scaling
climate risks that are fundamental to business, particularly around strategic                                   Water
                                                                                                                               Physical     factor (e.g., revenues, sales, units




                                                                                              W AT ER
                                                                                                                Intensity
resilience that aligns with a company’s sustainability goals. This begins with                                                              produced (cubic meters)

developing a process that identifies the right scope and framing when
                                                                                                                                            Amount withdrawn from areas of
assembling a risk assessment, knowledge and resources.                                                                                      high baseline water stress (cubic
                                                                                                                Water Source   Physical     meters)
                                                                                                                                            Amount treated and recycled (cubic
Reassess Risk Analysis                                                                                                                      meters)


                                                                                                                                            Percent of land by cover type (e.g.,
While the TCFD asks an organization to “assess its climate-related risks and                                                                grassland, forest, cultivated, pas-
                                                                                                                Land Cover     Physical
opportunities within the context of its businesses, operations, and physical                                                                ture, urban)




                                                                                              LA ND U S E
                                                                                                                                            Annual change in cover type
locations in order to determine potential financial implications,” it’s clear that
things outside of a business’s walls will have impacts on the business. The                                                                 Percent of land used for agricultural
                                                                                                                Land Use                    tillage, grazing practices, sustain-
TFCD methodology outlines potential physical risks to business from climate                                     Practices
                                                                                                                               Transition
                                                                                                                                            ability practices or conservation
change in Figure 3.                                                                                                                         practices


Organizations need new strategies to deal with supply chain turbulence.


                                                                                              L O CA TI O N
                                                                                                                Coastal Zone   Physical     Locations within a coastal zone
Traditional enterprise risk management (ERM) is too often simplistic, as each
risk is identified and addressed independently, while complex and longer-
                                                                                                                Flood Zone     Physical     Locations within a flood zone
termed interactions are rarely considered. What is more, the focus is often on
discrete events rather than gradual buildup of stresses. This approach doesn’t
                                                                                                                                            Amount invested in developing
prepare a company for when an unexpected event occurs or for an uncertain                                       R&D                         low-carbon products, services and/
                                                                                          R ISK A D AP TI O N
                                                                                           & M IT IGA T IO N




                                                                                                                                            or technology
future. Value chains and landscapes and the impacts of climate change on
them are complex and dynamic in nature and require constant attention to                                                                    Amount invested in deployment
sense vulnerabilities and to respond to unexpected shocks. Strengthening                                                                    of low-carbon technology, energy
                                                                                                                CapEx                       efficiencies etc.
resilience requires new and updated analytical tools as well as a cultural shift.                                                           Amount invested in resilience
                                                                                                                                            capabilities



                                                                                     14
Define your scope in a way that is focused and intentional and explicitly considers natural resources
The right risk framing and scope in risk analysis is essential. The scope of              action that does not take specific measures to protect your company as well
risk analysis refers to what specifically is to be assessed. Risk analysis should         as natural capital. The answer should not be, “We want to build resilience to
be a practice to inform decision-making; and defining your scope in a broad               climate change”, but rather broadly identified impacts on the previously defined
context is meaningless if the ultimate goal is to develop and decide on solutions.        subject of your scope. When framing your risk analysis, a company should
Therefore, analysis of a company’s vulnerability, exposure and adaptive capacity          consider shocks and stresses, past, current and future, and then prioritize
should be applied to something defined and specific. The first question                   addressing the most impactful.
companies should answer is, “What do I want to build the resilience
                                                                                          Again, the framing of a risk analysis should underscore the company’s reliance
of?” The company itself? A facility? It’s workforce and the communities where
                                                                                          on communities and nature. Climate risk is a factor of three things: exposure,
they live? The answer to this question should be focused and intentional, while
                                                                                          vulnerability, and adaptive capacity. Companies need to understand these
explicitly considering the landscape and landscape dynamics where solutions
                                                                                          factors as they relate to the landscapes where they are grounded. What are the
will be implemented.
                                                                                          most influential impacts on the community that provides your workforce, or the
The framing of risk analysis refers to what risks are considered and what                 ecosystem that nurtures and protects your water source? Natural capital and
information is used to assess risk. The second question a company needs                   ecosystem services must be at the core of risk scope and framing, if a company
to ask is, “What threats and impacts of climate change do I want to                       is to understand fundamental threats to landscapes, and therefore the health of
build resilience to?” This should be broad without being overly general. If               their supply chains.
the framing is too general, action can be scattered and unfocused, and lead to




                                                                                                                                                                             © Ashley Cooper / Global Warming Images/ WWF-US
 NATURAL CAPITAL AND
 ECOSYSTEM SERVICES
 MUST BE AT THE CORE OF
 RISK SCOPE AND FRAMING

                                                                                     15
Assemble baseline information from local, national,                                                 A R T & S C I E N C E : General consensus says that both
                                                                                                      must be leveraged in enterprise risk management
and international sources
Using the right information in risk analysis is key. Once a company
has identified the scope and framing of a risk analysis, they must
choose the right information to use to assess risks. There are two
dominant risk management frameworks used globally: the COSO
                                                                                         ART                                            SCIENCE
Enterprise Risk Management Framework (2002) (Committee of                  Understanding the risks and their                                       Formal tools and techniques are
                                                                           likely impacts on the business                                     important in order to systematically
the Sponsoring Organizations of the Treadway Commission) and               requires an astute and often                                    identify, evaluate and monitor business
the International Organization for Standardization (ISO) 31000             intuitive understanding of risk,                                         risks and theimpacts of any risk
                                                                           strategy, and human behavior.                                     management strategies or initiatives.
Risk Management Standard. However, over-reliance on the tools
                                                                                                                                             Descision Trees • Monte Carlo • Value
and techniques that are strictly quantitative and “science-based”              Intuition • People & Business
                                                                                                                                             at Risk (VR) • Stress Testing • Scenario
                                                                               Acumen • Industry
or, conversely, qualitative and “intuition-driven” can result in some          Experience • "Gut Feeling"                                         Analysis • Forecasting • Modeling
                                                                                                                                                  Uncertainty • Risk Quantification
important risks being misinterpreted or unaccounted for. And
if the information on climate risks to people and landscapes (see
                                                                                From: WBCSD’s “Sustainability and enterprise risk management: The first step towards integration”
ecosystems) is not considered, only part of the risk picture will be in
focus.

Therefore, it is important to consider interrelated risks, and risks on
                                                                                        OLD ERM                                             NEW ERM
a landscape-scale, use long-term climate information in risk analysis
and expand time horizons, and use multiple sources and types of
information in risk analysis.                                             Discrete information on                             Expand risk assessments to identify the extent
                                                                          individual risks                                    to which climate shocks and stresses may
The essential information needed for a valuable climate risk                                                                  adversely impact communities and ecosystems,
                                                                                                                              and the impacts that future changes in the risks
assessment can be grouped into three basic buckets: environment,
                                                                                                                              of such events could have
communities, and climate. Companies can use information already
at their disposal or collect new information, but information             Internally managed                                  Consult outside authorities
gathering should intentionally develop an understanding of context.
Information gathering is an exercise in understanding, which can          Short-term                                          Extend risk analysis and planning time horizons

help a company be proactive in their risk management. Baseline
                                                                          Internally gathered                                 Assemble baseline information from local,
information on historical climate patterns, current climate changes,      information                                         national, and international sources as well as
and future projections could be collected from a variety of primary                                                           qualitative as well as quantitative data
and secondary sources, including peer-reviewed journal articles
                                                                          The data is being disclosed is                      Integrate risks into strategic and operational
(where feasible), reports from local and national NGOs, hydro-met
                                                                          not being used for internal                         planning
services and agencies, and international sources.                         decision-making



                                                                          16
Focus on key vulnerabilities to people & places
One vital source of information for risk analysis comes from the ground. It is    Companies can use the risk assessment to hone their framing. Given a better
essential to include “bottom-up” or community, on-the-ground information          picture of climate risks, a company is better equipped to take intentional action
and perspectives into risk analysis and management. Decision-scaling is a         that addresses specific threats. Once risks are assessed and the intention
tool that can be used to allow the use of many climate projections to produce     is focused, a company then should develop strategies that address key
best estimates of future climate risks. Decision-scaling links bottom-up          vulnerabilities in their value chain.
vulnerability assessments and hazard identification with multiple sources of
climate information, such as top-down climate projections and modeled data
to estimate relative probabilities of hazards, yielding risk estimates.11

Regardless of the approach or level of detail, most risk assessments should
include:12


  1     Evaluation of exposure, sensitivity, and adaptive capacity
        of the ecosystem and communities.                                                                          KEY TAKEAWAYS
  2     Analyses of observed (historical) and projected (future)
        climate, land use, demography, and other important climate                                       •	 Define your scope in a way that is
        and non-climate factors.                                                                            focused and intentional and explicitly
 3      Evaluation of changes that have already occurred in the
        communities, ecosystem, or ecological process of interest.
                                                                                                            considers natural resources

                                                                                                         •	 Frame your assessment considering
 4      An objective scoring method to evaluate the relative
        vulnerabilities.
                                                                                                            system scale dynamics


 5
                                                                                                         •	 Assemble baseline information from
        Estimation of uncertainties of projected changes in both                                            local, national and international sources
        climate and non-climate drivers of change. Uncertainty can
                                                                                                         •	 Focus on key vulnerabilities to people
        be estimated using expert knowledge or statistical variation.
                                                                                                            and places

  6     An analysis of spatial information available for the
        potentially vulnerable areas.


  7     Narratives that describe key information sources,
         relevant ecological and geographical contexts, and
        justifications for rankings.




                                                                                 17
       2                 DEVELOP A STRATEGY TO MANAGE FOR CHANGE,
                         NOT JUST PERSISTENCE
Using the risk information garnered in the risk analysis process, the next
step in building resilience is developing or reassessing goals and strategy.
Resilience and sustainability should be at the heart of commercial operations
and investment decisions. With the right information, companies are
equipped to develop forward-looking, climate-informed goals that engrain the
resilience process and utilize a sustainability strategy to achieve their goals.
While resilience and sustainability should be the foundation of any company’s
broader plan, it is important to track how such a foundation is being built and
develop how it can be achieved.

Given the scale and magnitude of climate change impacts, sustainability goals
that focus only on maintaining the persistence of existing systems may no
longer be the best option. To utilize resilience as a risk management option,
open and honest dialogue about potential climate futures is necessary when
reviewing existing goals. Sustainability goals themselves often cannot be
achieved without using climate information and “stress testing” or scenario-
planning actions to meet them. Scenario-planning can provide insight into
the effectiveness of policies and strategies.


Develop robust strategies and targeted interventions aimed
at supporting communities and landscapes
Companies should look to existing management plans—e.g. water, supply
chain, disaster preparedness and response, and evaluate them for their
contribution to addressing climate risk. A very simple tool that allows for an
easy screening of existing proposed actions is the A-B-C process. Actions,
activities, or strategies are grouped into three basic categories:


                                                                                        © Ryan Bartlett


                                                                                   18
     A       Actions that already address climate change risk or help
             build climate resilience to some degree (like a disaster
             response plan, for example, for existing risks that are
                                                                                            Decision scaling and scenario planning are tools and processes that use regular
                                                                                            stakeholder consultation alongside modeling analysis to determine ‘robust’—
                                                                                            meaning they work under multiple futures—and optimal actions under a range
             already worsening or will in the future due to climate change)                 of different climate and economic development scenarios. These tools help
                                                                                            identify ‘win-wins’, or solutions that work for multiple stakeholders as well


     B
                                                                                            as strategies that will not be effective in any future. Not surprisingly, these
             Actions whose success or failure depends on climate
             change, but are not currently designed to address it                           tools allow for a range of levels of complexity, from more simple approaches
                                                                                            evaluating fewer scenarios via mostly qualitative information to academic
                                                                                            modeling exercises based on both qualitative and quantitative approaches where

      C      Actions that have no relation to climate change
             whatsoever
                                                                                            economic performance is evaluated for specific proposed actions under multiple
                                                                                            climate scenarios to determine the most ‘optimal’, ‘robust’ interventions that
                                                                                            meet stakeholder priorities, are cost-efficient, and perform well under different
It will often be the case that existing activities in already agreed upon plans and
                                                                                            climate extremes. They are the logical next step in the risk strategy process from
strategies are not sufficient to address the priority impacts, vulnerabilities, and
                                                                                            the risk assessment.
risks identified in the risk assessment. Additional activities directly related to
already proposed activities may be necessary, so it is useful to think of them in           Just as the vulnerability and risk assessment process should evaluate system
the context of the existing plans.                                                          scale factors, it is equally as important to tailor activities to multiple scales,
                                                                                            from individual households and communities, to larger surrounding sub-
Once this filtering process has been completed, internal discussions across
                                                                                            watershed or basin, to engagement in platforms and roundtables. Community,
relevant teams or key staff should follow a prioritization process for A or
                                                                                            household, or business level actions are important to have demonstrable impact
B actions and entirely new activities not included in any strategy that are
                                                                                            in mitigating specific risks, while interventions will be necessary at larger
most essential to either ramp up or develop anew. An obvious initial list of
                                                                                            scales to build resilience to risks to entire systems. Examples run the spectrum,
potential resilience priorities for a business would be existing top priorities for
                                                                                            from localized rainwater harvesting or wells to increase supplies for local
sustainable sourcing, water use, risk management, and any current plans for
                                                                                            communities to large scale reforestation and restoration programs in upper
disaster risk reduction and response. For entirely new actions or activities, a full
                                                                                            watersheds to reduce sedimentation and increase groundwater infiltration. This
project evaluation assessing the potential performance of the investment against
                                                                                            is once again, where existing larger sustainability strategies or management
multiple criteria may be necessary.
                                                                                            plans—ie integrated watershed management plans—can provide a particularly
                                                                                            useful backbone for local to landscape scale action.
Use scenario planning to consider alternative climate
futures when identifying options
Scenarios are stories that describe potential futures. Scenario planning should
be conducted throughout the risk analysis and decision-making process to                                  SCENARIOS ARE STORIES THAT
determine the best path for action. It is not a onetime activity that yields final
answers but a process to evaluate and inform decision-making on multiple                                  DESCRIBE POTENTIAL FUTURES
stages and scales.

                                                                                       19
Select strategies by aligning options with desired
outcomes of socio-ecological resilience                                            The WWF Water Risk Filter
At a minimum, resilience strategies should respond directly to the                 Already a leading online tool for companies and investors to assess
vulnerabilities, impacts, and risks. However, to truly assess the                  and respond to water risks, the WWF Water Risk Filter is expanding
effectiveness of a proposed action requires some evaluation of its                 to provide forward-looking scenarios of water risks, based on
performance under alternative future climate scenarios, i.e. by                    climate and socio-economic changes, and aligned with TCFD and EU
determining its robustness. Without this step, there is no way to plan             NFRD recommendations. The Water Risk Filter scenarios are based
for the often very high uncertainty of how climate change will affect              on the combination of the most relevant climate scenarios (IPCC
systems. While there is more certainty about changes in temperature                Representative Concentration Pathways – RCP) and socio-economic
and related heat extremes since they are and have been increasing                  scenarios (IIASA Shared Socioeconomic Pathways – SSP). More
linearly since the industrial revolution (thus the term global warming),           specifically, these scenarios are based on climate impact ensemble
it is much more scientifically difficult to project out future rainfall            projections that account for climate (e.g., temperature, precipitation)
patterns, especially without 30 year observed data histories based on              and socio-economic variables (e.g., population, GDP), and represent
spatial networks of weather stations that are often lacking in many                the consequences and effects of climate and socio-economic
regions. To tackle this uncertainty, a wide variety of organizations are           changes on water resources. Learn more here.
increasingly using scenario planning tools that have been employed
since the 1960s by the private sector to be more flexible and adaptive
to changing conditions, tailored to specific uncertainties of changing
rainfall patterns and other future climate risks.

There are a variety of tools and approaches to facilitate a scenario
planning process, depending widely on the level of complexity, from
complex economic optimization modeling and decision scaling to
more basic discussion of priorities under alternative future climates.
A simple approach is to organize a stakeholder consultation workshop
representing key actors in the basin—for example through an existing
watershed management planning process—and discuss resilience
priorities and their likelihood of success under alternate climate futures.




                                                                              20
Restructure roles and processes to address climate resilience
and sustainability
While having the right risk analysis methodology is vital, it is equally important
to have the right process and structure in place to respond to risk. This is another
important part of the assessment phase to determine how you are able to respond
and how you are planning. Internally, a company should undertake an audit of
capacity to be prepared for climate events and can recover from them quickly,
and in a way considers other longer-term goals and stakeholders.

If we are espousing understanding, responsiveness, flexibility, and continuous
                                                                                                   KEY TAKEAWAYS
improvement, what does corporate structure look like in order to achieve this?
Building capacity for climate resilience within a company requires the right                •	 Develop robust strategies and targeted
structure and incentives. Sustainability teams and chief sustainability officers               interventions aimed at supporting
are increasingly reporting directly to their CEO, giving them a direct line to                 communities and landscapes
influencers are decision-makers who can create broad structural and cultural
changes within a company.                                                                   •	 Use scenario planning to consider
                                                                                               alternative climate futures when
Regardless of where a sustainability team sits within a company, sustainability                identifying options
goals should be clearly communicated throughout the company and the entire
resilience process should be ingrained across teams.                                        •	 Select strategies by aligning options with
                                                                                               desired outcomes of socio-ecological
Use scenario planning to consider alternative climate futures                                  resilience

when identifying options                                                                    •	 Restructure roles and processes
                                                                                               to address climate resilience and
The ultimate success of any resilience action plan will depend just as much
                                                                                               sustainability
on internal ownership and buy-in to the process as external stakeholder
engagement. Climate change affects so many aspects of business operations,                  •	 Increase climate literacy within the
including and beyond existing sustainability efforts, increasing awareness and                 professional workforce
literacy in the larger workforce is a worthwhile investment of time and resources.
There are a number of easy ways to begin this process, for example through
hiring outside consultants to run a series of staff trainings, but engaging directly
through a process of discussing existing work plans and strategies will have
the greatest impact. Otherwise, it will continue to be seen as largely a “future
problem”, rather than the immediate all-hands-on-deck challenge that it is.


                                                                                       21
       3                 IMPLEMENT LOCAL SOLUTIONS THAT ARE
                         NATURE-FRIENDLY, RESPONSIVE, AND FLEXIBLE
Implementing solutions requires a multi-faceted approach that prioritizes investment
in Resilient Sustainability. There are essentially three basic types of interventions
for building resilience to climate change: engineered approaches like infrastructure
to control flooding or provide water; nature-based approaches that use ecosystems
natural benefits for people that help reduce impacts from hazards like flooding,
landslides, fires, or drought; or investments in human capacity like training programs
to improve people’s ability to understand and manage risks. All three are critical
components of any resilience plan, but nature-based solutions (NBS) are currently an
underutilized solution that can provide multiple benefits for people and nature.

The primary challenge in employing nature-based solutions is ensuring that
they are most effective, and provide the most benefits, at larger scales; a
local constructed wetland to capture pollution runoff and excess stormwater will still
provide local benefits, but will not be as effective, especially for increasingly intense
storms, as managing an entire watershed through protection and restoration of
upstream forests or downstream wetlands.


Use scenario-planning to evaluate effectiveness and resilience
of nature-based solutions
When prioritizing and potentially investing in NBS, it is especially important to
consider how they are also directly vulnerable to climate change. Many NBS projects
have failed because they failed to evaluate their effectiveness under climate change;
for example, mangroves that were planted without considering rising sea levels, or
reforestation with trees that immediately die due to extreme drought or flooding.
Furthermore, the return on investment of a nature-based solution, or the resilience
benefits they provide, is greater if those solutions are also stress-tested and designed
based on climate projections of prioritized impacts.13

                                                                                            © Thippakone Thammavongsa / WWF-Laos


                                                                                      22
Identify a range of options at both site and system scales                                   Build partnerships for resilience at scale
Just as the vulnerability and risk assessment process should evaluate system                 Building partnerships is critical to help companies address their risks in
scale factors, it is equally as important for companies to consider multiple                 deep and meaningful ways, and provide the scale needed to solve social and
scales, from individual households and communities, to larger surrounding                    environmental problems. While there are some actions largely internal to a
sub-watershed or basin. Community, household, or business level actions are                  business that will not require a regular process of stakeholder engagement,
important to have demonstrable impact in reducing their specific risks, while                for example plant operations and maintenance, there are some risks and
interventions will be necessary at larger scales to build resilience to risks and            interventions that can only be addressed in consultation and partnership with
impacts that affect entire systems. Examples run the spectrum, including                     others. Furthermore, while companies must commit resources to solutions,
localized rainwater harvesting or wells to increase freshwater supplies for local            partnerships are a way to optimize the use of and diversify resources that
communities, as well as large scale reforestation and restoration programs                   provides potential for greater impact and sustainability.
in upper watersheds to reduce sedimentation and increase groundwater
infiltration. This is once again, where existing larger sustainability strategies or
management plans—ie integrated watershed management plans—can provide a
particularly useful backbone for local to landscape scale action.


Evaluate intervention options that meet resilience criteria
All operations are influenced by factors outside their borders. This is especially
true with respect to climate impacts, which affect ecosystems at local and global
                                                                                                                     KEY TAKEAWAYS
scales. As a result, resilience options will also need to be effective across a broad
range of scales. All proposed actions and interventions should be evaluated                              •	 Use scenario-planning to evaluate effectiveness
against their general contribution to resilience for people, infrastructure,                                and resilience of nature-based solutions
and nature. Regardless of the scale of the proposed activity, to ensure actions
                                                                                                         •	 Identify a range of options at both site and
will contribute to resilience, they must be assessed against specific identified
                                                                                                            system scales
vulnerabilities, impacts, and future risks.

At a minimum, resilience actions should respond directly to the vulnerabilities,
                                                                                                         •	 Evaluate project options that meet resilience
impacts, and risks identified in previous steps. However, to truly assess the
                                                                                                            criteria
effectiveness of a proposed action requires some evaluation of its performance                           •	 Build partnerships for resilience at scale
under alternative future climate scenarios; i.e. by determining its robustness.
Without this step, there is no way to plan for the often very high uncertainty of                        •	 Invest in nature-based solutions
climate change.




                                                                                        23
       4                 MONITOR, EVALUATE, AND ADAPTIVELY MANAGE




                                                                                   © Antonio Busiello / WWF-US
How do you know you are on the right track? There are a number of ways
a company can track their progress in building resilience by evaluating
implementation of the above steps which can provide companies a means
of understanding their resilience gains. A company can audit how they are
identifying, assessing, and managing climate-related risks and how they are
integrated into the organization’s overall risk management.


Measure your internal resilience process by assessing
maturity
Companies can benchmark success by how they do things like use
climate, environmental, and social information in risk screening; gather
information from landscapes and stakeholders on the ground; implement
environmentally conscious disaster risk management policies and
practices; and extend time horizons in planning. And reflected in those
things, we should see the WWF’s 3 principles of resilience: don’t harm
nature, use nature to help people, and help nature adapt. Because without
these principles, and without focusing on landscapes, people and nature,
a company’s response to climate change impacts could have unintended
negative consequences for people and nature.

Resilience is about maintaining progress in the face of shocks and
stresses. The best way to know if your company is “resilient” is to look at
performance in the face of a wide array of shocks and stresses. The second
way a company can measure resilience is to measure their progress on
meeting their goals. Companies should continue to measure progress on
goals, while tracking shocks and stresses and measuring how well they’re
doing. Same goals, different outcomes.



                                                                              24
Measure intervention resilience in a landscape
The third way a company can measure resilience is through a simple benchmark in
line with WWF’s resilience principles to measure if and how a company is doing all
it can to avoid harming nature, investing in nature-based solutions, and how those
solutions are holding up in the face of shocks and stresses. This is best applied at the
intervention or landscape scale. While standards for certain commodities or natural
resource management can be used as a measuring stick, particularly in regard to the
first principle of doing no harm to nature, they are often insufficient if not coupled
with actions based on climate information. Therefore it is important for a company to


                                                                                                   KEY TAKEAWAYS
expand their risk interventions to address specific resilience in landscapes.


Be adaptive by testing, measuring, and enhancing work
Constant reevaluation is essential when measuring resilience due to the substantial
                                                                                            •	 Measure your internal resilience process
uncertainties of future risks. Building resilience requires continually reviewing
                                                                                               by assessing maturity
new information and knowledge, re-assessing past assumptions, and stimulating
learning. More collaborative processes can also help. Building partnerships is critical     •	 Measure project resilience in a landscape
to addressing risks in deep and meaningful ways, and providing the scale needed to
solve social and environmental problems.
                                                                                            •	 Be adaptive by leveraging the resilience
                                                                                               framework to test, measure and enhance
                                                                                               work over time
Create ongoing opportunities for knowledge exchange
                                                                                            •	 Create ongoing opportunities for
Creating open dialogue and knowledge exchange also strengthens a company’s social
                                                                                               knowledge exchange
license to operate. Social license to operate is an essential part of a healthy business.
And profits alone do not create social license. Without social legitimacy, companies
might find it difficult to access physical inputs and financial capital as well as obtain
permits and other resources to function. A company is not only impacted by climate
risk within its fenceline but by how communities are affected by climate change
and how they respond to those effects on their lives and livelihoods. It is important
for companies to create a space for dialogue and collaboration with stakeholders
in a landscape. There are a range of advantages to a broad and well-functioning
participation. An informed and well-functioning group has the potential to build trust
and a shared understanding – both fundamental ingredients for collective action.



                                                                                      25
                                                            © Martin Harvey / WWF
CONCLUSION
Resilience is a practice in listening, learning, and
adapting. This guidance itself is intended to be
updated and expanded upon as we learn more
about our changing world and relationships.
Companies must play a central role in finding
ways to help create a functioning economy
and society in the face of unprecedented
challenges and change without compromising
the natural systems we all rely on for our health
and wellbeing.  We know that nature is an
integral part of the solution and can help us
build resilience to climate change, but we must
help nature too. The central philosophy that
companies must now employ is that resilient
nature, resilient landscapes, and resilient
communities build resilient business.




RESILIENT NATURE,
RESILIENT LANDSCAPES,
AND RESILIENT
COMMUNITIES BUILD
RESILIENT BUSINESS.
                                                       26
REFERENCES
1.	   CDP. (2018). Global Climate Change Analysis 2018.                              10.	 Adapt Now: A global call for leadership on climate resilience. Global
                                                                                           Commission on Adaptation. (2019)
2.	   Greenbiz. (2019). State of Green Business.
                                                                                     11.	 Brown, C., Ghile, Y., Laverty, M., and Li, K. (2012), Decision
3.	   Weathering the Next Storm: A Closer Look at Business Resilience; Maher,
                                                                                           scaling: Linking bottom-up vulnerability analysis with climate
       Katy; Peace, Janet; C2ES (2015)
                                                                                           projections in the water sector, Water Resour. Res., 48, W09537,
4.	   Sustainability and enterprise risk management: The first step towards                doi:10.1029/2011WR011212.
       integration; WBCSD (2016)
                                                                                     12.	 Gross, John E., Woodley, Stephen, Welling, Leigh A., and Watson, James
5.	   Maximising the Impact of Partnerships for the SDGs; Stibbe, D.T., Reid,              E.M. (eds.) (2016). Adapting to Climate Change: Guidance for protected
       S., Gilbert, J.; The Partnering Initiative and UN DESA (2018)                       area managers and planners. Best Practice Protected Area Guidelines
                                                                                           Series No. 24, Gland, Switzerland: IUCN. xviii + 129 pp
6.	   https://www.politico.com/newsletters/the-long-game/2020/05/05/
       pandemic-companies-rethink-saving-world-489074                                13.	 Kenneth R. Young & Sisimac Duchicela (2020): Abandoning
                                                                                           Holocene Dreams: Proactive Biodiversity Conservation in a Changing
7.	   The Economist Intelligence Unit, “The Cost of Inaction: Recognising the              World, Annals of the American Association of Geographers, DOI:
       Value at Risk from Climate Change,” 2015.                                           10.1080/24694452.2020.1785833

8.	   The Business Case For Climate Leadership: Amazon’s Social License
       To Operate. Nives Dolsak and Aseem Prakash; https://www.forbes.
       com/sites/prakashdolsak/2020/01/29/the-business-case-for-climate-
       leadership-amazons-social-license-to-operate/#5a0076e4212a

9.	   Roxburgh, T., Ellis, K., Johnson, J.A., Baldos, U.L., Hertel, T.,
       Nootenboom, C., and Polasky, S. 2020. Global Futures: Assessing the
       global economic impacts of environmental change to support policy-
       making. Summary report, January 2020. https://www.wwf.org.uk/
       globalfutures




                                                                                27
