People, passion, change
Friends of the Earth's Annual Review 2008-09
1

The year we achieved a landmark breakthrough

In 2008 Andy Atkins took over as Executive Director of Friends of the Earth. He reflects on his first year in the post and thanks our supporters up and down the country whose powerful commitment has made the difference.

I cut my teeth campaigning on human rights, moved into international development then increasingly focused on the environment. Of course they`re inextricably linked. Uniquely in my experience, Friends of the Earth combines them all, defending the environment and people's rights to a healthy environment, promoting truly sustainable development here and globally.

I've worked with many inspiring people and have been involved in some remarkable campaigns, like Make Poverty History. But in my first year at Friends of the Earth I've been deeply impressed by the way staff, volunteers and supporters have engaged their local communities and politicians in practical solutions to tackle the threats to the environment that we all rely on. We cannot thank you enough.
An extraordinary groundswell of support meant 2008 was the year we achieved a landmark breakthrough: on 26 November 2008 the Climate Change Act passed into law, the result

The year at a glance

of a campaign started by Friends of the Earth and embraced by many other organisations. The law is a world first, creating a framework for the UK to make legally binding cuts in greenhouse gases right up to 2050. Of course we didn't stop there. As you'll read, we are now building on this success with three even more ambitious campaigns: Demand Climate Change, Get Serious About CO2, and The Food Chain. These embody our integrated response to the two greatest environmental problems confronting humanity ­ climate change and biodiversity loss.

This is the age of the global challenge ­ and our campaigns must increasingly meet the challenges at an international level. So I feel privileged to draw on the inspiration and learning of friendships and campaigns from my years in the development sector. Today as never before we must drive to the top of the agenda the needs of people hand in hand with the needs of a healthy planet.
After perhaps the most effective year in Friends of the Earth's history, we must continue to keep up the momentum and build on our collective achievements. This annual review offers a wealth of

ideas and evidence which show that, together, we are capable of changing the world for the better. Yours
Andy Atkins Executive Director

The Big Ask. The big breakthrough

Our Big Ask campaign for pioneering climate change legislation delivered a spectacular advance for the global environmental movement. Thanks to supporters like you, this fouryear campaign secured every one of our key demands.
The Big Ask was the most ambitious campaign Friends of the Earth had ever mounted. And it worked: 200,000 people of every age and background persuaded the UK Government to pass the first ever climate change law. This means there will be: 1) legally binding annual cuts in greenhouse gases; 2) an overall target of 80 per cent reductions by 2050; and 3) the inclusion of emissions from international aviation and shipping.
How did we do it? By changing the way the wind was blowing in politics, raising awareness nationwide and inspiring people from all walks of life to get involved. We built the campaign on robust research and worked with a range of expert partners to create public pressure that the Government simply could not ignore. This, alongside detailed lobbying by our expert campaigners helped secure the support of MPs from across the political spectrum. The Government and opposition listened ­ and the resulting Act is a success we should all be proud of.
BUILDING ON the Climate Change Act We're working to make sure that the Climate Change Act results in practical action so that the emissions reduction targets are met, year after year. Already we've secured two very significant measures that will help boost UK production of renewable energy.

Renewable energy strategy In 2008 the European Union debated proposals for renewable energy targets. In the face of intense resistance from the UK Government, our awareness-raising and activism built momentum for a strong UK target. We worked with partners including the Stop Climate Chaos coalition, of which we are a founder member, and inspired thousands of people to ask the Government to change its course. We won. The UK has a target of producing 15 per cent of its energy from renewable sources by 2020. That's a massive gain from a starting point of just 2 per cent. This achievement will help communities across the UK struggling to reduce their carbon footprint.
Feed-in tariffs The UK lags behind most of Europe in generating renewable electricity. One main reason is the lack of a financial incentive for communities, households, farmers, businesses and local authorities to install their own renewable electricity.
Germany has for some years operated a feed-in tariff ­ a premium paid for electricity from renewable sources. As a result the country has 10 times more wind power and over 200 times more solar power than the UK. Feed-in tariffs have proven to be a successful way to boost renewable electricity generation in 20 European countries. The potential in the UK is immense.
This is why we mounted a campaign this year for the UK to introduce a feed in tariff. We welcomed the support of parliamentarians, civil society, unions, businesses, investors and celebrities as we led a successful coalition effort to include such a measure in the Energy Act 2008. This was one of our most significant wins this year and could completely transform Britain's supply of energy. As a result we were named Advocate of 2009 at the British Renewable Energy Awards.

The Big Ask goes global The Big Ask campaign is now spreading across the world ­ and we're supporting our partners with all the experience and knowledge we gained from our success in the UK. Campaigns in 17 EU countries are demanding governments commit to reducing carbon emissions. That's Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Malta, The Netherlands, Scotland, Slovenia, Spain and Sweden.
In all these countries The Big Ask is proving a powerful vehicle for raising awareness in innovative and challenging ways ­ and getting results. A short film by Friends of the Earth in Belgium was seen by well over 1 million people on Belgian TV ­ and the national Green Party has tabled a proposal for a climate law ensuring annual emissions cuts. In Austria politicians are adopting a climate bill; and, in Finland, two climate bills on greenhouse gas emissions have been submitted.
Above: Our campaign for a climate bill is inspiring action in 17 countries across Europe
Opposite: Timely interventions ensured emissions from international flights and shipping were included in the climate change bill


"You have changed history and you have changed what Britain does and hopefully what the world does. I think you should be very, very proud of what you have achieved... This was an incredible team effort ­ by politicians, but most of all by the popular movement that was led by Friends of the Earth."
­ Ed Miliband, Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change

"MPs received over 500,000 pieces of correspondence from the public calling for the Bill ­ a fantastic example of public campaigning from Friends of the Earth."
­ Dr Greg Clark MP, Conservative Shadow Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change

"It would have been absolutely impossible for those of us who were campaigning for that [the Climate Change Act] inside Parliament to achieve that without the external pressure that came from all of you ­ and Friends of the Earth in particular."
­ Martin Horwood MP, Liberal Democrat Shadow Environment Minister

The Big Challenge: a fast-changing context

In a tumultuous year for the global economy we have shown why the environment needs to remain top of the political agenda. By briefing MPs, media and opinion formers, and ensuring an informed public debate through our local groups, we have pressed the argument for practical, just and planet-friendly solutions to the economic crisis. This has included promoting the benefits to the economy of a thriving solar and wind-power industry, and providing ways for people to conserve energy and cut their fuel bills.

Imminent threats Humanity faces two massive threats: climate change and biodiversity loss.
The planet has already warmed by 1 degree since the Industrial Revolution. Beyond 2 degrees, there is a far greater chance we will trigger runaway global warming.
The amazing diversity of life on Earth is under threat. Scientists believe we are in the midst of the biggest mass extinction since the end of the dinosaurs ­ and that human activities are causing it.
Our response? This year with your vital support we have launched three major campaigns. Building on the momentum of The Big Ask our new campaigns are tackling local and global emissions and defending the biodiversity and finely-balanced natural systems that we rely on utterly.
Through these linked campaigns we're pushing for a strong and just global agreement on tackling climate change; encouraging councils across Britain to make deep cuts in emissions under their control; and making one of the most polluting industries ­ meat and dairy ­ more environmentally responsible.

Gettyimages

"We all know that this is the great challenge of our time. But it's also a great opportunity because if we can seize this moment, we can open the door to a new economy for the 21st century that will bring new energy, new jobs and new hope to families."
Barack Obama in a speech on the challenges of energy and climate change
Demand Climate Change

In the lead-up to the UN climate talks in

Copenhagen in 2009 and beyond we've

been making a powerful case for international climate justice.

In partnership with 51 Friends of the Earth groups across five continents we are calling for rich countries to meet their legal and moral responsibilities to lead in addressing global warming.
Ahead of the Copenhagen talks in particular we argued that rich countries must cut their own emissions ­ by at least 40 per cent by 2020 without carbon offsetting. Our research showed that offsetting swaps real cuts in rich countries for hypothetical cuts in developing countries. Yet meeting our own emissions reduction targets would put our economies on a secure low-carbon development path

­ reducing our dependence on fossil fuel and creating new green jobs at home.
We also called for the rich world to provide new money to developing countries so they can grow cleanly, while adapting to the effects of climate change that are already affecting millions of people.
Speaking out across the world As part of Friends of the Earth International, a federation with 77 member groups, we have roots and influence across the world. We worked shoulder to shoulder with our international partners to prepare for the talks in Copenhagen in 2009.

For example, alongside colleagues from Malaysia and Germany we launched our report on offsetting A Dangerous Distraction at the UN climate meeting in Bonn in June. Representatives from a wide range of countries drew on it substantially during those negotiations.
In the same week we launched a global online campaign to press rich countries to act for climate justice. The petition got off to a flying start, gaining 10,000 signatures from five continents in the first two weeks.
Our work built towards the talks themselves, where we sought to influence decision makers both inside negotiations and from the outside ­ planning a peaceful public show of concern, The Flood, in the Danish capital in December.

"Ours is a voice united in the call for change. Ours is a role defined by the need ­ to help lead the development of a global movement for climate justice to ensure a safe climate."
Senior international Climate Campaigner Asad Rehman

"The world is at a crossroads. [We] must come to the most ambitious agreement ever negotiated or continue to accept mass starvation, mass sickness and mass migration on an ever growing scale. If leaders cannot assume responsibility, they will fail humanity." Kofi Annan

For more updates on Demand Climate Change: www.demandclimatechange.org


Our campaign for local action seeks a 40 per cent cut in climate-changing emissions in communities across the UK.

Local authorities can influence emissions from housing, energy and transport, which together amount to 80 per cent of UK emissions. But few are acting with the ambition or urgency we need to see real change on our doorsteps.
Get Serious About CO2 shows people how they can influence decision-makers locally to reduce emissions from homes, provide lowcarbon transport options, and begin to grow renewable power.
The effects should soon be all around us. We are pressing local authorities to provide free loft and cavity-wall insulation; to back renewable energy

such as solar water heating for homes; to consider small-scale wind farms; and to promote better public transport, walking and cycling. We also need a switch to low-carbon vehicles such as electric cars.
Progressive, practical schemes like these will create new jobs at a time of rising unemployment, cut fuel bills and make our towns better places to live and work.

Progress so far Already we're working with 80 of our local groups, who are taking the campaign to local people and building pressure on their local authorities to act. Nationally we're looking to create the framework that will promote local action. We're researching the practical benefits of communities going green ­ the jobs, the numbers of people able to escape fuel poverty. We're the only organisation tackling this issue at local level by generating grassroots pressure on councillors.

"With strong arguments on our side, we are winning people over and soon we'll start seeing real changes in our local environment."
Senior UK Climate Campaigner Tony Bosworth
For more on Get Serious About CO2 go to www.getseriousaboutco2.com
Rolling out the Climate Act means getting down to business ­ like making homes cheaper to heat

"Our research shows that local action to cut CO2 will be good for people and the economy. If a national energy efficiency programme were launched in partnership with councils to insulate homes and businesses, and fit green energy to buildings, it could create at least 70,000 jobs across England and Wales ­ and slash fuel bills."
Senior UK Climate Campaigner Tony Bosworth on why Get Serious About CO2 matters to ordinary people.


9

"The soya people come from outside, they don't know our ecosystem. They suck the wealth and life out of the land here ­ and leave nothing for us. And when they have destroyed everything and cut down the trees that have fed people for hundreds of years, and soya is finished, they will go away."
Brazilian priest and activist, Father Edilberto Sena. In 2008 we arranged for Father Sena to meet UK politicians to highlight the treatment of local people at the hands of big business.

The Food Chain
Our new Food Chain campaign exposes the destructive chain stretching from our kitchens to the forests in South America.

Putting the future of planet­ friendly farming in the hands of local producers

Why this campaign, now? Our research has shown that one industry produces more climate changing gases than all the planes, lorries and cars put together ­ and also drives deforestation.
If we're to prevent catastrophic climate change and dangerous biodiversity loss we can't ignore the damage that factory farming is doing. The Government is all but ignoring the meat and dairy industry's environmental hoofprint. In fact, it's pumping millions of pounds of taxpayers' money into intensive farming ­ the most damaging kind.
This year we launched our call for the Government to support good food, thriving farms and a healthy planet.

This means backing small and planet-friendly farming and making sure that the supermarkets pay our farmers a decent price.
Protecting forests and human rights in Paraguay Paraguay, along with Brazil and Argentina, has seen rapid soy expansion. Senior Food Campaigner Clare Oxborrow helped to expose the links in the food chain in South America through an investigative trip with our partner Sobrevivencia ("survival"), Friends of the Earth Paraguay. She collected eye-witness accounts of forest being destroyed and families forced off their land to make way for soy plantations. This soy ­ most of it genetically

modified ­ is exported to the UK and Europe where it is used to feed pigs, chickens and cows in factory farms.
We are working with Sobrevivencia to make sure local communities are better able to resist these plantations and to promote sustainable alternatives.
Achievements so far The campaign stretches from communities in Paraguay where villagers are resisting big companies, to Westminster where MPs are debating how to implement our solutions.
Within months of the public launch thousands of Friends of the Earth supporters had already asked their MP to fix the food chain. The Guardian and Telegraph

used our research, helping to sway opinion in our favour. Our report What's Feeding our Food? called on the Government to build a healthy domestic farming sector ­ and by May 2009 our parliamentary petition asking for a reformed food chain was one of the most successful of the year, securing cross-party support from a third of MPs.
For more on the Food Chain Campaign, go to www.fixthefoodchain.com

10


Glyn Thomas

Simon Rawles/Friends of the Earth

Protecting biodiversity

Biofuels Rainforest cut down to make way for biofuel crops in the name of tackling climate change? This was the year we exposed this dangerous anomaly and created a massive shift in public perception.
We joined forces with Friends of the Earth Europe as part of the European Biofuels Coalition to expose the problems with biofuels. Our campaigning showed how growing biofuels for crops on an industrial scale is catastrophic for the environment. Destroying rainforest releases carbon emissions, drives local people off their land and into poverty, and wipes out precious biodiversity. We called instead for sound alternatives such as

fuel-efficiency legislation and improved public transport.
"[The campaign] was outstanding and very professional in terms of argument proposed, scientific underpinning, strategic positioning and creativity."
Our European Biofuels Campaign was named Campaign of the Year in the European Public Affairs Awards 2009

Resource use Europe uses far more than its fair share of the Earth's finite resources. This threatens the planet's biodiversity and climate ­ and is profoundly unjust. Our campaign this year argued for a legallybinding framework to ensure that the European Union reduces its consumption over the next 25 years. Yet without an effective system for measuring resource use the EU cannot set targets to move to a more sustainable footing. Therefore we worked with partners to identify how this could be done ­ running a series of seminars in Brussels with participants from Friends of the Earth groups in Europe, development and social NGOs and the European

Commission. We used our research How to Measure Europe's Resource Use to persuade EU decision-makers to act.
At national and local levels we demonstrated how recycling targets can be delivered in practice in the UK. Our conference "Maximising Recycling and Minimising Residual Waste" attracted around 100 people, including representatives from local councils.
We helped the UK Without Incineration Network (UKWIN) set up an online map of planned incinerator sites, helping 61 groups oppose inefficient waste management and promote alternatives.


11

The regions and nations

Our strong regional presence means we are well placed to drive local solutions to global issues as well as regional-specific problems. This year our expertise and influence again secured some significant successes.

Rights and justice

Friends of the Earth is the only national environmental campaigning organisation providing free legal advice and representation to members of the public through its Rights and Justice Centre.
We worked with the Friends of Queen's Market in East London who were angry about a redevelopment which would threaten the 110-yearold market, selling fresh produce at cheap prices in one of the capital's disadvantaged and most diverse boroughs. It was going to become a building site to make way for luxury flats and a supermarket. But after local people like Pauline and Saif attended Power Up ­ our annual weekend of training and workshops ­ the campaign went into overdrive. As a result, 2,500 individually written letters were submitted to the council and 12,000 people signed a petition. Thanks to this campaign, the Mayor

of London refused planning permission. Friends of Queen's Market are working on a plan for a locally-owned, positive redevelopment that will ensure a bright future for the market.
The Rights and Justice team also took on the Government's plans to replace our democratic planning system for big developments with a one-sided process of consultation ­ a way to fasttrack damaging developments like coal-fired and nuclear power stations, roads, airports, and ports. Over 30,000 people have responded to our call to say this was completely unacceptable. Thanks to our campaign the Government must now consider climate change when drawing up national policy on such big developments.
The team has also demonstrated how sharply we can focus the law in the service of the environment. This year our legal team

scored its first-ever House of Lords victory ­ preventing the police from imposing impossible conditions on the Critical Mass cycle ride to promote green transport in London. All five law lords upheld the group's appeal.

Des Kay, a regular Critical Mass cyclist, says:
``I'm delighted with the outcome, which I hope will persuade more people to come on the rides. Really big thanks to all of you at Friends of the Earth."

Training in rights bears fruit for Pauline and Saif in East London

12


Krystina Stimakovits

In East London we prevented the ill-conceived Thames Gateway Bridge from going ahead. We challenged claims that the scheme was essential for jobs and regeneration, exposed the adverse impacts it would have on local people and proposed better transport solutions. In a similar vein we are working in an alliance to challenge the proposed Mersey Gateway Bridge at a public inquiry.
In the Peak District we joined a coalition of local, regional and national organisations working to save the picturesque and nationally significant Peak Park (see above) from the threat of uncontrolled quarrying. The Court of Appeal upheld our appeal against a controversial High Court decision last year which had effectively removed any controls on quarrying at the site. This may have the knock-on effect of providing protection for other important sites around the country.
Across England we have also acted in support of developments aimed at providing people with clean energy and sustainable transport choices.

Friends of the Earth Cymru celebrated the scrapping of the Gwent Levels motorway scheme. We had argued that the £1 billion, six-lane toll road would boost traffic and carbon emissions and cut a swathe through the protected Gwent Levels ­ damaging biodiversity in one of the largest surviving areas of ancient grazing marshes in Britain (see above). Scrapping the scheme is an opportunity to resolve the existing road's safety and maintenance problems through lower-cost measures along the M4 and other local routes. Friends of the Earth Cymru campaigner Neil Crumpton said:
"The scrapping of the unaffordable and traffic-generating Gwent Levels motorway is vital to tackle climate change and cut Wales' carbon emissions."

Businesses, trade unions, farmers, voluntary organisations and environ mentalists united around a common platform ­ the Green New Deal for Northern Ireland, modelled on the US New Deal during the depression of the 1930s. Ours calls on Government to create thousands of new jobs by expanding the environmental sector, securing our energy supply and building a competitive low-carbon economy.
Friends of the Earth also brought together a coalition to research measures for housing, public and commercial buildings, renewable energy, sustainable industries, employment and skills and finance mechanisms. In time, this package could transform Northern Ireland and set an example for others.

Local champions LEADING CHANGE

A powerful, committed and well-organised network of people creating change at local level is one of the defining features of Friends of the Earth's contribution to positive change.
Local groups at the Greater South East regional gathering in London May 2009

More than 200 of our groups played a crucial role in bringing the Climate Change Act into being. Lobbying their MPs, working the media, and engaging the public they persuaded MPs overwhelmingly to back the law. Alongside national-level efforts our local groups also run inspirational projects focused on tackling issues in their areas, such as targeting unwanted supermarkets, promoting recycling and engaging young people.
From nationwide coalitions demonstrating widespread public support to lobbying decision makers face-to-face, from media coverage to street stalls, from letter writing to public meetings ­ each year we get the voices of tens of thousands of people heard right across the country.

Tasting success
Local groups were key to the success of many of our national campaigns this year.
Biofuels: Groups raised awareness of the threats posed by biofuels when they took our campaign into their communities. Through street campaigning they enabled local people to show their opposition to biofuels, writing to and lobbying MEPs in person.

Renewable energy: More than 140 groups took part in a day of action to build public support for a strong EU renewable energy target. And they brought together more than 1,300 local businesses and community groups to pressure the UK Government to commit to deliver on that target.

Demand Climate Change: Groups used our partnership with the makers of the climate change film The Age of Stupid to galvanise the public into taking action on climate solutions. Brent Friends of the Earth hosted a week of events reaching over 1,300 viewers at London's Tricycle Theatre, while the Leeds group held a sell-out screening to inspire the audience to get involved in their local campaigns.

"Friends of the Earth was a key element in the beyond-our-wildest dreams success of the UK release of our climate change film. They organised screenings, helped pack cinemas, generated loads of press attention and advised on our campaign strategy every step of the way."
Director of The Age of Stupid, Franny Armstrong

For more about your nearest local group visit www.foe.co.uk/community/local_ groups/find_group.html

COMMUNITIES at work
As well as playing a key role in our national and global campaigns, our local groups lead on solutions to protect and improve their local environment. Here's a sample of their amazing work.

Manchester Friends of the Earth Birmingham Friends of the Earth
Harrogate Friends of the Earth Jess Hurd/reportdigital.co.uk

Right: Thousands of local Friends of the Earth volunteers carry the flag for the planet

Transforming travel in Manchester: The group led a city-wide effort to encourage the people of Manchester to say yes to major investment in public transport. The significance of this work lies in the group's leadership of a coalition of unusual suspects ­ not just campaign groups but businesses and other networks across the Greater Manchester area ­ that gained significant media coverage through a range of innovative techniques. This hugely impressive work won Friends of the Earth's own Local Groups Campaign of the Year Award.

Greening Cornwall: Friends of the Earth Cornwall has been instrumental in the creation and development of climate-friendly parishes. Thanks to supporters across the county, the St Merryn group secured £50,000 for a community garden and allotment project, and is working with a local school on a renewable energy installation.
Shop local first: Banbridge and Mourne Friends of the Earth protected small and independent retailers threatened by plans to relocate a Tesco supermarket. Months of campaigning bore fruit when Northern Ireland's Environment Minister blocked the move on the grounds that it broke planning policy to protect town centres.

Faith and Change in Birmingham: The efforts of our Birmingham group to engage faith communities with the challenges of climate change received an Environment Agency communications award for best Community Engagement project this year. This inter-faith partnership has been working for two years with different communities to help them deliver environmental solutions at home, at work and in places of worship.
Multi-faith dialogue in Birmingham gives voice to climate solutions.

Manchester group promotes green transport for the city.

16


Empowering the next generation: Our local groups Youth and Education Network is bigger than ever before. This year 83 local group volunteers reached 2,500 young people via assemblies, stalls, curriculum-based lessons, workshops and talks. "Great ­ fast moving and interactive," "professional, friendly and encouraging," and "very interesting and informative" are just some of the reactions from young people who have attended our local groups events.
More on Friends of the Earth's Youth and Education work, including our partnership with Girlguiding UK at www.foe.co.uk/learning

Car-free Harrogate: Our local group persuaded people to ditch their cars when they held their first Car-Free Day. Some roads showed as much as a 10 per cent drop in traffic.
Harrogate turns a corner with car-free day

Individual Champions Although much of our work at local level is carried out by organised local groups we do not underestimate the power of the individual. That well-timed visit to the MP, that brilliant letter to the local newspaper, or that flood of emails to the right person at the right time all help shift the debate in favour of the environment. Every year we inspire people to add their voices to our campaign and help build public pressure for change in a variety of ways. For example, we set up a network ­ Campaign Champions ­ of which there are now 2,300 getting heavily involved in our campaigns. So far they have taken action on the Big Ask, our Renewables Campaign and now Get Serious About CO2. Our email action lists and social networking sites are empowering more and more people to support our work. Over the next few years we'll be building even more engaging and innovative ways for individuals to express their desire for real and lasting solutions by taking action with us.


17

WHERE YOUR MONEY GOES

Friends of the Earth Trust
Friends of the Earth Trust is committed to the conservation, protection and improvement of the environment and promotes sustainable development for public benefit. It furthers these objectives by campaigning, undertaking research, education and publishing, and providing an information service on solutions to environmental problems.

Statement of financial activities for the year ended 31 May 2009.


"I feel that Friends of the Earth is leading the field by showing how green solutions will create a more prosperous, sustainable way of life, creating new jobs and improving well-being. My support is more important than ever and I'm very happy to be working with Friends of the Earth to make sure we make real and lasting change."
Stephen Brenninkmeijer

The accounts for Friends of the Earth Trust and Friends of the Earth Limited were audited by haysmacintyre. They were approved on 31 October 2009 and have been submitted to the Charity Commission and Companies House. These summary financial statements do not contain sufficient information to allow a full understanding of the financial affairs of the charity or company.
