ANNUAL REVIEW
UK
2009
Conservation Climate change Sustainability
How we inspired change

high notes
Proud, footsore, inspired and humbled. A trek to document the positive changes we're making in Nepal left many lasting impressions on WWF's Greg Armfield. Changes that are helping locals to reduce their impact on the country's natural wonders.

I was struck by the scale of things in Nepal. Famously, the mountains here are the world's tallest, and the views are equally awe-inspiring.

But it was at the smaller scale that I was most impressed. Local communities here are working together, with our help, to reduce their impact on their threatened natural surroundings.

The wildlife that might wander into people's backyards here is rather grander than your usual. Hungry elephants can be quite a problem, destroying a farmer's crop in a single visit. This has led to conflict between people and wildlife.

"I saw countless examples of how
our innovative approaches were being
whole-heartedly embraced."
Greg Armfield

But I saw how WWF has figured out an alternative ­ getting locals to grow mint as well. It brings in more money than rice, and is less attractive to elephants. Simple, but effective.
A common sight across Nepal was that of people weighed down by huge loads of fuelwood.
But on the outskirts of Chitwan national park, there's a village where 90% of residents now cook with biogas ­ methane produced from cow dung and human waste. It might sound like a pungent recipe, but the result is actually a far cleaner fuel.

No more chopping and carrying, no more wood smoke in people's houses, and far less pressure on the park's precious resources. A real success, thanks to a project we funded.

On the borders of another national park ­ Bardia ­ I saw the positive impacts of the work we started here 10 years ago. Our initiative involves helping local communities look after their own patch of forest sustainably (see photo on previous pages), and ensure they leave grass growing for rhinos and elephants. This includes creating cooperatives that enable locals to take out loans at low interest rates.

The upshot? Some of the poorest people have been given a chance to earn a decent living ­ setting up a shop, or becoming pig or goat owners. This means they no longer need to take from the forests we're trying to safeguard. Instead they feel like they have a real stake in the future of this area.

Because of their ongoing success, similar schemes are now sprouting up across Nepal.

I saw countless examples of how our small-scale, innovative approaches were being whole-heartedly embraced by the irrepressible locals here. It made me feel hopeful, proud and humbled.


We're optimistic about the future. How can that be, when the planet is overheating? When millions face devastation? When the survival of special places and vulnerable creatures hangs by a thread? We're feeling positive because we're taking practical steps to give the world a brighter future.

We're tackling three really big challenges:
1. Conservation Safeguarding the natural world has always been close to our hearts. Our forests, oceans, rivers and lakes are under severe threat. Unless we protect them, countless creatures that depend on them could vanish. It could also jeopardise the livelihoods of many millions of people. We're not going to stand by and watch that happen.
2. Climate change Climate change is a reality. But there's still plenty we can do to protect our planet, people and wildlife. Such as drastically cutting global greenhouse gas emissions. Getting politicians and ordinary people to open their minds and change their ways. And finding new ways to cope with the changes we're already living with.

3. Sustainability We can all learn to use fewer natural resources. It's vital that we do. Because if everyone in the world lived like we do in the UK, it would take nearly three planet Earths to support us. And we can't forget the wildlife that share the same resources.

These challenges are tough. But they're not insurmountable. We've got the experience and the scientific know-how. We've got the passion and the determination to strive for a better future for nature, and for people. What we need is support: from communities, from politicians, from governments. And from you.



Hundreds of millions of people switched off their lights for WWF's Earth Hour, making it the world's largest display of public concern about climate change. See a film of landmark buildings across the world switching off at earthhour.wwf.org.uk/highlights

conservation
Everything we do is connected. Lose a habitat and the animals it supports go too. Cut down a forest and the threat of climate change grows. Leave people in poverty and they may destroy the local habitat to survive.
Nearly a quarter of all mammals and a third of amphibians are threatened with extinction. A billion people don't have access to safe drinking water. Our natural world is in crisis.
But since 1961 WWF has fought to break these patterns of destruction and waste. And we still are. Helping to ensure people and nature can live harmoniously ­ and thrive.
How do we do all this? We're on the ground in the world's most important wild places, creating real solutions to real problems. We're also in the corridors of power when our expertise is needed most.

Thanks to our lobbying, 15,000 sq km of the Russian Arctic is now

a protected park. We've persuaded the Russian government to ban

all industrial activity in the reserve, which is in Novaya Zemlya, an

island that points out into the Arctic Ocean between the Barents

and Kara seas. So its polar bears, walruses, reindeer and many bird

species can live free from disturbance and pollution.

2

13% Island reserve One of the world's largest marine protected areas has been set up

around the sub-Antarctic Prince Edward Islands. It'll help protect

the region's diverse wildlife. Large numbers of albatross that breed

here have been killed by illegal boats targeting Patagonian toothfish.

We drafted management plans for the reserve, and worked closely

for years with the South African government to achieve this success.

80 canals River restored

3

We've helped to close more than 80 unauthorised canals that were

taking water from Tanzania's Great Ruaha River. Since the early

1990s, over-abstraction for crop irrigation caused the mighty river

to run dry for many days a year. Our work over several years with

the water authority has considerably improved the flow, which is

a vital source of water for six million people, and wildlife including

elephants, hippos and crocodiles.

4

100m Wetland landmark The creation of a protected wetland site in the high Andes has helped

us meet a pledge to conserve 100 million hectares of wetlands in

just 10 years. The newly-protected Catamarca Lagunas complex

in Argentina is home to two species of flamingo, and threatened

Andean cats. Now we're making an even bigger pledge ­ to protect

250 million hectares of wetlands by 2015.

5

35 Whale boost Our determination to save one of the world's most endangered

whales had a welcome boost. We convinced the oil and gas

consortium Sakhalin Energy to suspend seismic testing around

Sakhalin Island in the Russian Far East. This is a crucial breeding

and feeding area for the western Pacific gray whale. Just 35 breeding

females remain. The sound frequencies used in these seismic tests

are known to distress the whales.

6

1/3 Leopard lifeline We're working with the first timber company to have been awarded

a `conservation concession' in the Russian Far East. The Nerpinskoye

Cooperative Society has been leased 45,000 hectares in an area

where most of the remaining leopards are found. The project will

enable us to restore vital habitat for critically endangered Amur

leopards and their prey. And to increase coverage of forest

by a third over the next 40 years.

7

700 Pandas reunited We're working with the Chinese government to bring 700 giant

pandas back together in China's Minshan mountains. That's nearly

half the giant pandas left in the wild. Since the 1950s, a busy road

has divided them into two groups. We've fought for years to get the

road rerouted. Now a new 11km tunnel will do just that. We're also

planting 80 sq km of arrow bamboo to give them a steady food supply.

8

5+ Rhino hope Our new video traps have allowed us to check on the health and

behaviour of Javan rhinos. We've spotted encouraging signs ­ five

females have new calves. The monitoring helps us identify suitable rhinos

to move to a new site where we'll establish a second viable population.

This is essential as, with fewer than 60 Javan rhinos surviving, the

species could be easily wiped out by disease or natural disaster.

9

20% Logging breakthrough Our campaign to stop illegal logging led to a strengthened draft

of the proposed EU timber regulation. The European Parliament

incorporated tougher checks and penalties in a new law governing

trade in timber. This is a milestone in our work to stop massive forest

destruction worldwide. Our research shows that almost one-fifth

of wood imported into the EU in 2006 was from illegal sources.

10 yrs Fish first

10

Ten years ago we helped set up the Marine Stewardship Council (MSC)

to help preserve fish stocks. Now, the MSC has certified major cod

and haddock fisheries in Norway as being harvested sustainably. Many

other Norwegian fisheries are also expected to be accredited. This

will make the country the world's biggest provider of MSC-certified

fish. And set an example for other nations to follow.

Keep updated about what we're fighting for. Visit wwf.org.uk/news

1 15,000sq km

8 5+

All industrial activity has been banned in 15,000 sq km of the Russian Arctic

Our new video traps have helped us spot five Javan rhinos with new calves. With fewer than 60 surviving in the wild, this is encouraging news
3 80 canals

We've helped to close 80 unauthorised canals that were taking water from Tanzania's Great Ruaha River. It's considerably improved the river's flow

5 35
We convinced an oil and gas consortium to suspend seismic testing in a crucial breeding and feeding area for the western Pacific gray whale. Just 35 breeding females of this species remain

6 +1/3

7 700

We'll increase suitable forest for Amur leopards by a third over the next 40 years

2 13%
The new marine protected area around the Prince Edward Islands supports 13% of the world's king penguins, and five species of albatross breed there

A new 11km tunnel in China will divert a road that currently separates 700 pandas into two populations

Conservation

An act of Ten years ago we launched a campaign to safeguard the UK's
dedication seas. A decade on, our dedication has led to legal protection that's among the most comprehensive
to our seas in the world. When a WWF report showed that some of the most precious species and habitats in UK waters were greatly threatened, we knew we had to act. "The UK had lost about 80% of its saltmarshes, which provide nursery areas for fish and act as a buffer against flooding and storms. Seahorses, harbour porpoises and a plethora of other wildlife were in severe decline," says Simon Walmsley, our marine expert.

"It's unique ­ a potential one-stop shop for deciding on all things marine. This is the element I'm proudest to have
helped achieve."
Simon Walmsley

Then we spotted an opportunity. The UK had signed up to international agreements to improve management of the seas and create protected areas. So we pressed the UK government and devolved administrations to introduce a law to meet these commitments.
"After repeated knock-backs from certain industry lobbies and delays in Parliament, finally it's a done deal," Simon adds.
"And it's unique. Nowhere else on the planet will have a Marine Management Organisation [MMO] ­ a potential one-stop shop for deciding on all things marine. This is the element I'm proudest to have helped achieve. If the UK gets it right, the MMO will not only help solve environmental problems but also manage human developments, such as many renewable energy projects at sea, more effectively."

Our global presence has been crucial. Our knowledge of what's happening elsewhere on the planet allowed us to highlight marine protection efforts in other countries that have been successful. We've also advised against those that haven't.

Our influence in all countries across the UK has also made a difference. "We've managed to get stakeholders to see beyond political boundaries when agreeing how to protect marine resources," notes Simon. "After all, fish don't know whether they're in Scotland or England."



The work isn't over. Next up, we'll make sure the legislation is implemented effectively. We can't put in so much time and effort and not follow it through.
For Simon, a lifelong sea angler, there's also a personal motivation: "When I was small, if I went fishing off a pier I would always catch mackerel. Now I have to go 20 miles out to catch anything decent. I'd love to see their return in abundance ­ it'd be a real indicator that we're taking good care of our seas."
Watch our film about the new Marine Act at wwf.org.uk/marineact

70 miles
In this small island nation, we're never more than 70 miles from the coast

11,000 SPECIES
There are 11,000 species of animals and plants in the UK's seas

50%-98%
Population stocks of major fishery species in the North Sea have declined over the past century by between 50% and 98%, and some species have become locally extinct

1/4
Estimates show that nearly a quarter of the UK's sea bed has been affected by human actions such as trawling and other industrial activities

<2%
Less than 2% of UK seas are protected from damaging human activities



Conservation

Green sky A billion trees. Our new Amazon rainforest campaign with Sky will show they're worth more if they're thinking left standing. For the people who live there. For the wildlife of the Amazon. And for the planet.

The Amazon rainforest contains possibly the greatest diversity of life on Earth. It's crucial for regulating the world's climate. And it's home to 30 million people, almost all of whom rely on the forest for their food, shelter and livelihoods.

"Finding new ways to help these people make a living from forests, while ensuring the trees are left standing, is fundamental to the future of the Amazon," says Sarah Hutchison, who leads our forests work in Brazil.

"Finding new ways to help these people
make a living from forests, while ensuring the trees
are left standing, is fundamental to the future of the Amazon."
Sarah Hutchison

So this year, with Sky, we launched a campaign called Sky Rainforest Rescue to show that the forests can be worth more alive than felled. And to save a billion trees, across three million hectares.
We're working in Acre, a state in western Brazil where 12% of the forest cover has been lost. The area we're focusing on first is particularly vulnerable to increased rates of deforestation because a major highway that's currently being paved runs through it.
"New roads improve access to untouched areas, so you find higher levels of illegal logging," Sarah explains. "Where the highway is paved there are only small pockets of forest left. In stark contrast, along the unpaved sections the forest is largely intact."
We're trialling economic incentives for local people to look after their forests. Participants who sign up commit to measures such as not chopping down mature forest or using fires to manage their land. In return, they get technical assistance on managing their land more productively; priority access to credit; and even a modest cash bonus for meeting their commitments.

"The first indications are good," says Sarah "We've heard that fire use has dramatically reduced on farms that have signed up to the voluntary scheme. And the commitment of the governor of Acre and his team are truly inspiring. I'm thrilled that we're making a difference."




Forested areas and patches cleared for cattle pasture in Acre, Brazil. Such deforestation is much more common next to roads or navigable rivers, where access is easier. Real progress has been made in slowing the rate of deforestation in Acre.

climate change
We're ready for our most daunting challenge yet. Millions of people worldwide will suffer the consequences if climate change spirals out of control. It'll also threaten the places and animals we've done so much to care for. And we're already seeing the effects. Some of the planet's coral reefs, for example, are bleaching and dying as the seas warm.
For a good chance of keeping the rise in global temperatures to less than the critical 2°C threshold, we need to slash the world's greenhouse gas emissions by 80% before 2050. We need to end our reliance on fossil fuels. We need to stop destroying our tropical forests. And we need to find new ways to deal with the changes we're already starting to see.
How is WWF helping to achieve all this? Through tireless campaigning. By spurring on like-minded people. And by convincing world leaders to do the right thing.


a big deal A melting polar bear in Trafalgar Square. Thousands joining the biggest wave of support for climate change action. And our experts working day and night to influence world leaders. We pulled out all the stops to press for a fair and ambitious climate deal.

Heads of government from 119 countries gathered in Copenhagen in December to try to reach an agreement on how the world tackles climate change. It was an unprecedented turnout, making us hopeful that they were taking seriously the biggest environmental threat to people and wildlife.

But, at best, the UN climate summit was chaotic. At worst, it was moments away from total failure.

Following a series of all-night talks, the upshot is the Copenhagen Accord. This isn't the legally-binding agreement we were calling for. Just a voluntary arrangement where countries can set their own emission reduction targets. So, there are no guarantees that it'll result in the cuts needed to prevent dangerous climate change.

3ºC
Average global temperature rise we estimate under
the Copenhagen Accord

We estimate that what political leaders have put on the table adds up to at least 3°C warming. And that's of huge concern. Widespread devastation becomes inevitable after just a 2°C rise in global temperatures.
"With a lack of targets and money on the table, the Copenhagen Accord is too weak to address climate change appropriately," says Dr Keith Allott, who heads our climate programme.
But, he adds, there's still time to make a difference: "The Accord could be a stepping stone to a fair and binding deal, if we build on the positive aspects. For instance, it's good news that it acknowledges the need to keep the global temperature increase below 2°C, and that there must be transparent international financial support for developing countries to tackle climate change.

"But a more ambitious, legally-binding agreement must be struck. World leaders must recognise that the job was not done at Copenhagen, and must seal the real deal before it's too late. It's that simple."



Our team was a major presence at the Copenhagen conference ­ both inside and outside the negotiating rooms. We ensured that the voices of WWF and our supporters were heard loud and clear. Together with other organisations, we produced a 160-page draft treaty detailing the key elements needed in an agreement that avoids the worst impacts of climate change.

58,000
people joined The wave, backed by wwf, to
demand action on climate change

We were part of the UK's largest ever mass public demonstration on climate change ­ The Wave. The event, organised by the WWF-backed Stop Climate Chaos coalition, saw an estimated 50,000 people gather in London, and 8,000 more in Glasgow and Belfast, to demand action on climate change.
We handed in our Vote Earth petition, signed by almost 28,000 supporters, to climate and energy secretary Ed Miliband. The petition demanded that the EU pledges to cut emissions by at least 40% by 2020.

And in London's Trafalgar Square, we created a life-size ice sculpture of a polar bear to highlight that a warming planet will affect all life on Earth. The eye-catching bear, which melted to reveal its bronze skeleton, encouraged many passers-by to learn about climate change from our staff.

There's still everything to play for in 2010. Please sign up to WWF's Earth Hour and keep the heat on world leaders to deliver a fair and binding climate agreement. wwf.org.uk/earthhour

2ºC
Widespread devastation becomes inevitable after just a 2°C rise in global temperatures
28,000
Almost 28,000 supporters signed our petition calling on the EU to cut emissions by at least 40% by 2020

1.77m
The ice bear we exhibited in Trafalgar Square is the same height as the average thickness of Arctic sea ice the Catlin Arctic Survey measured this year ­ just 1.77m



Climate pressure Almost 20,000 of our supporters wrote to

the Scottish government demanding strong
successes climate change legislation, thanks to our campaigning. This represented 94% of all

responses to the government's consultation

80% ­ input that helped ensure the new Climate Change (Scotland) Act is the strongest climate change law in the world. It set a vital precedent

carbon reduction in the run-up to the Copenhagen summit.

targets in both UK and Scotland climate change acts

Both the Scotland and UK climate change acts have set tough targets on greenhouse gas emissions ­ a reduction of at least 80% from 1990 levels by 2050. We now need to ensure that the governments drive the changes needed to achieve this. Key battles this year were over plans for a new coal-fired power station at Kingsnorth and a third

runway at Heathrow.

+30 yrs
The plan for the UK's first new coal plant in over 30 years has now
been shelved

Coal future? Two years of campaigning and legal work by WWF has paid off. We've been opposing the power company E.On's plans for a coal-fired power station at Kingsnorth in Kent. This would have been the first new coal plant in the UK for more than 30 years, and there were no firm provisions to capture and store the carbon it would emit. E.On has now shelved the project, a decision it claimed was due to the recession. But our efforts have undoubtedly had an impact.
The government has accepted that no new coal plants can be built in the UK without at least some level of carbon capture and storage. We've also gained significant support from politicians and business this year over the need to reduce energy consumption and strongly develop renewable energy.

Heathrow challenge Aviation is one of the fastest-growing sources of emissions in the UK. If government plans for a third runway at Heathrow go ahead, the airport will become the single largest generator of carbon in the UK. So we helped launch a legal challenge to the third runway and we're pressing for a wider review of the government's aviation policy. Our research shows that businesses are looking to cut business flights rather than increase them ­ which challenges the government's main justification for expansion.
Our new One in Five Challenge encourages businesses to reduce their flying. Find out more on page 33



The night Big Ben. The pyramids. Sydney Opera House. The Eiffel Tower.
the lights Why did these and hundreds of other world-famous landmarks plunge into darkness for an hour
went out on 28 March? WWF's Earth Hour was the reason. Our international lights-out event marked the launch of our campaign to show world leaders there's overwhelming support for action on climate change ­ the biggest global threat to wildlife, habitats and people.


A huge number of people joined in. Hundreds of millions of you, in more than 4,000 cities and towns in 88 countries, switched off your lights in the largest ever display of public concern about climate change.
In the UK, 750 businesses and 1,400 schools joined in too.
The lights were even turned off or dimmed at 10 Downing Street. Gordon Brown acknowledged the significance of the event: "It shows just how passionately people feel about tackling climate change, and sends out a clear message that the world is ready to take action."

WWF's Earth Hour was an instant success.

At the UN climate talks in Bonn, which started the following day, the executive secretary of the UN's climate change convention, Yvo de Boer, called on the delegates to heed Earth Hour and the huge show of public concern. He urged them to take action. We also organised a single-city Earth Hour in Copenhagen to coincide with the critical UN talks that took place there in December.




Climate change

On thin ice How far would you go to help protect the Arctic ice cap? Polar explorer Pen Hadow went 440km. On foot. Across the region's shrinking sea ice.

Enduring temperatures of -45°C. Noting 16,000 observations. And taking 1,500 measurements of ice and snow. The Catlin Arctic Survey was precisely as its leader, polar explorer Pen Hadow, describes it: "A pioneering feat of human endurance combined with a scientific endeavour."

"An entirely melted Arctic is unthinkable
­ it is one of our planet's defining features from space."
Pen Hadow

But the groundbreaking survey, which we backed, has been well worthwhile. The expedition's intrepid trio ­ Pen, Ann Daniels and Martin Hartley ­ provided us with new, much-needed evidence about the state of Arctic sea ice. And in time to support our call for a strong global climate deal at the UN climate summit in Copenhagen.
Sea ice has an important cooling effect on the Earth's climate system ­ and its rapid disappearance from the Arctic directly threatens the polar bear. It also contributes to the warming of the planet.
The shrinking is already happening decades ahead of most predictions. The results from Pen's survey showed that the situation is more perilous than satellite image interpreters and computer models predicted.

"What we found was this younger, thinner ice," says Pen. The average depth of ice was just 1.77m ­ suggesting that it was almost all first-year ice, which is more likely to melt. "Our scientific advisers had told us to expect thicker, older ice on at least part of the route. So it's a mystery where that older ice has gone."

As well as the scientific need, Pen was driven by a powerful emotional connection he feels with the Arctic: "I have a responsibility to this beautiful place, which has given me so much in the past. An entirely melted Arctic is unthinkable ­ it is one of our planet's defining features from space. We cannot allow the white lid to be taken off the planet."

Watch our film about how Arctic warming affects us all. Visit wwf.org.uk/backyard



Polar explorer Ann Daniels pulls supplies through Arctic ice rubble, during the Catlin Arctic Survey's 73-day trip to provide new evidence about the state of the sea ice. On average, the ice they measured was just 1.77m thick. This suggests it was almost all first-year ice, which is more likely to melt.

© Martin Hartley

Climate change

protecting Planting trees in the sea? It's just one way we're safeguarding the
a tropical people and wildlife of Belize from the dangers of climate change. WWF's Beth Marshall went to paradise see for herself. The Mesoamerican reef stretches over 1,000km, off the coast of Central America. Its corals and mangroves are home to an array of wildlife. From sea turtles to more than 500 species of fish.

But great swathes of mangroves have been cleared to make way for hotels, marinas and shrimp farms. This is putting the reef and the people who live near it in danger.

"When you fly over, it's plain to see where vast tracts of mangroves have been cleared," says Beth Marshall, who works in our climate change team.

"When you fly over, it's plain to see
where vast tracts of mangroves have
been cleared."
Beth Marshall

"That's removed a vital line of defence. It's leaving low-lying places even more vulnerable to rising sea levels and more frequent storm surges."
With funds from the UK government's Department for International Development, we're working with the people of Belize to turn the tide.
Beth explains: "We're connecting with people from government policy makers to local communities. In Placencia, we're helping people understand why the mangroves reduce disaster risk. We've already planted around 12,000 new mangrove seedlings."

We've also shown the Belize government how much its mangroves and corals are worth. A report we compiled with an environmental research organisation ­ the World Resources Institute ­ values them at US$395-559 million a year in terms of fisheries, tourism and shoreline defence. But only if they're properly protected.

"Showing the Belize government the incredible value of a protected reef has added weight to our calls to make sure that any coastal development is done sustainably," says Beth.



Our research is also proving popular with the locals and tourists. "Tour guides are getting snorkellers involved. They're helping us to monitor impacts on the reef, by identifying areas of bleaching and different diseases on the coral."
But our work needs to reach far beyond Belize's shores. "Even if we cut all global emissions now, the climate will continue to change. All countries need to act now to adapt to more intense and frequent climatic events," Beth adds.
"We're using our findings to convince world leaders to agree on funding and measures to help vulnerable countries, communities and ecosystems adapt to the impacts of climate change."
A natural partnership Our work on climate change adaptation in Central America is one of many WWF projects that the UK government's Department for International Development (DFID) funds. Our partnership works to improve environmental governance, which includes the way governments, civil society and businesses make decisions that impact on the environment. We focus on issues including poverty, climate change, sustainable consumption and trade. We've worked together since 1986, and DFID's latest support for us is worth £13.3 million between 2008 and 2011.
sustainability
How much stuff do we really need? If everyone had the same lifestyle as people in the developed world, it would take three planets to feed, clothe, transport and house them.
We only have one planet. But if we take better care of it, everyone can thrive. People and wildlife. Lots of us will have to change the way we live. It's not going to be easy changing people's habits. But with the right help and encouragement, it can be done.
How is WWF going about it? We're coming up with practical ways to make business and industry more sustainable. And we're promoting greener lifestyles.


Water footprint This year we published a groundbreaking report which was the first measurement of the UK's total `water footprint'. It highlighted how much of the water used to produce our food and cotton for our clothes comes from countries that are running out of fresh water.

"Huge amounts of these products are grown in drier areas of the world where water resources are either already stressed or very likely to become so in the near future," says Stuart Orr, WWF's water expert. Water shortages threaten species, ecosystems and billions of people.

The average UK citizen uses 150 litres of mains water a day. But we consume about 30 times as much in `virtual' water ­ for example, water used to produce the food we eat and the clothes we wear

The UK is the world's sixth-largest importer of water. Understanding our water footprint is an important step towards better management of this most precious resource. We're working with governments, academics, NGOs and some of the world's largest companies to improve water stewardship, especially in countries where water is scarce.
Financial transformation This year, the world has felt the fallout from a financial system focused on short-term economic growth that puts business first. A huge transformation is urgently needed so that the needs of society and the environment are also considered. That's why we've helped launch the Finance Lab, a collaboration between representatives from finance, business, government, academia and civil society. Through the Finance Lab's innovations, we'll demonstrate how a redesigned financial system could act in the interests of business, society and the planet.

Guiding challenge We've been working with Girlguiding UK to challenge young people to take an active role in protecting the natural world. Our exciting collection of challenges, pledges and competitions inspired more than 34,000 girl guides to learn how the choices they make about food and shopping have a huge impact on wildlife and the environment. More than 90% of them went on to change their spending habits and reduce their consumption.



Welsh inspiration Wales has become the first country in the world to commit to a future using only its fair share of the limited resources of our planet ­ and the Welsh Assembly Government credited WWF Cymru with inspiring the move.
The government is already using the concept of ecological footprint, pioneered by WWF, to measure Wales' environmental impact. People in Wales, like the rest of the UK, currently live as if they have the resources of almost three planets at their disposal. The One Planet, One Wales scheme, launched at the Hay Festival in May, aims to bring this down to an equitable level by putting sustainable development at the heart of government.
Great British refurb We teamed up with TV presenter Kevin McCloud to launch the Grand Designs Great British Refurb campaign, which aims to dramatically reduce carbon emissions from the UK's 26 million existing homes.
In July, we invited MPs and ministers to help Kevin insulate a 10fthigh model house outside Parliament. We also handed in a petition with more than 8,000 signatures calling on the government to do more to reduce household emissions.

UK homes are among the least energy efficient in Europe. They also make up more than a quarter of UK emissions. Insulating existing homes would save nearly 18 million tonnes of carbon dioxide per year ­ equivalent to taking 5.5 million cars off the road. It would also create tens of thousands of new jobs and save households hundreds of pounds a year in energy bills.

Find out more about our work to make our homes more efficient at wwf.org.uk/oneplanethomes

Oil protest We urgently need to cut carbon emissions and invest in alternatives to fossil fuels. Yet energy companies pour vast sums into `dirty fuels' like tar sands, which cause three times the carbon emissions of conventional oil production. We're campaigning against these destructive projects.
In February, we protested outside the Canadian embassy about Canada's continued expansion of oil production from tar sands.



Canada's tar sands developments are so vast that they can be seen from space. Some US$379bn of projects to expand tar sands exploitation are set to be developed in Alberta, Canada, by 2025. They would cause untold damage to Alberta's forests and fresh water, and contribute to climate change. We're calling for them to be halted.

We were also invited in, to voice our concerns to the ambassador. As well as emitting unacceptably high levels of greenhouse gases, Canada's tar sands exploitation is destroying pristine forest, threatening wildlife and polluting water. Indigenous people who live downriver from the tar sands developments have seen an unusual number of cases of a rare cancer and other medical conditions.

Some US$379 billion of projects to expand tar sands exploitation are set to be developed by 2025

We've also highlighted that investments in dirty fuels are likely to falter in an increasingly carbon constrained future. This would affect many people's pension funds, billions of pounds of which are invested in energy companies. We've lobbied the government to demand that all UK companies in the energy sector report on their total carbon impact.

See our photo story about Canada's tar sands at wwf.org.uk/ canadaoil

Fragrant success A new luxury perfume will provide a sustainable livelihood for nomadic people while helping protect elephants, rhinos and other wildlife in Namibia, thanks to a project we funded. While working with the Himba people, the project team identified a fragrant resin from a wild plant called omumbiri. The fragrance proved a hit with perfume giant Estée Lauder, which has now launched a scent based on it. Harvesting the resin will provide an important new source of income for the Himba.
We've been promoting sustainable livelihoods, such as ecotourism, in Namibia for many years. Local people are now seeing the economic benefits of protecting natural resources, and wildlife numbers are recovering as a result.

Campaigning for change We rely on our dedicated campaigners to support our work by contacting politicians about the issues they care about. Their action really helps to bring about change. We also work with politicians of all parties at the devolved, UK and European levels helping parliaments and assemblies to take action on climate change, resource use and the protection of nature.
Find out how you can help at wwf.org.uk/campaigns



ONE IN FIVE The UK government says we need more business air travel to fuel the economy. We know there are takes off far greener options. A growing number of companies are taking up our challenge to cut one in five flights.

"What's videoconferencing got to do with pandas?" Lucy Bertenshaw has been asked this a lot in the last year. The answer is found in our One in Five Challenge, which Lucy is spearheading.

Businesses that sign up agree to cut their air travel by 20% over five years. By using alternatives like videoconferencing, they'll save money. They'll also cut greenhouse gas emissions, which cause climate change ­ the gravest global threat to people and wildlife.

"At WWF we don't do finger-wagging and say everyone's
got to stop flying. We put forward
positive solutions and say `what about
trying this?' "
Lucy Bertenshaw

We launched the challenge after finding out that top UK companies are keen to reduce their business flying. But they need help in convincing staff to change the way they meet and travel.
We're showing that it's possible for businesses to fly less while remaining competitive. And that building more runways isn't necessary. We've mounted a legal challenge to the proposed third runway at Heathrow. But if the runway goes ahead, the airport will become the UK's biggest source of greenhouse gas emissions.
"The government says airport expansion is necessary for UK plc," says Lucy. "We want to show that businesses are changing the way they stay connected and reducing their reliance on air travel."

Businesses that have already signed up include Arkadin, BT, Capgemini, Marks & Spencer, Premiere Global Services, the Scottish Environment Protection Agency and Vodafone UK.

We're determined to prove the culture of business travel can be changed ­ and that companies will benefit from it. Decisions can be made much more quickly and productivity improved if someone can simply step into a videoconference room, rather than fly across the Atlantic. Members of the One in Five Challenge will form a supportive community, sharing ideas and learning from each other.


Aviation is one of the fastest-growing sources of emissions in the UK. It's currently responsible for 13% of the damage the UK does to the climate. WWF's One in Five Challenge helps companies cut their business flights by 20% over five years. This will save businesses money and reduce their impact on the environment.


People, planet, It's not every sausage that can claim to be protecting freshwater profit... and environments, reducing greenhouse gas emissions and improving the lives of local communities. But a pigs new approach to pig farming in China is doing all this and more.

Pollution is a big problem in China's Central and Lower Yangtze regions. "Most of the pollution is agricultural, and one of the most virulent forms is pig slurry," says Philip Leonard, who leads our work to restore wetlands and waterways here. "Because the slurry is so full of nutrients, it causes huge algal blooms which suck all the oxygen out of the water. Everything dies, and the water is undrinkable."

"It's a classic people-planet-profit
situation. These projects have a life of their own without the need for ongoing support from WWF."
Philip Leonard

Pig farms also produce a lot of methane ­ a greenhouse gas 23 times more harmful than carbon dioxide. So when the Chinese government identified the region as a leading area for pig production, we decided to step in before a bad situation got worse.
We worked with a far-sighted local pig farmer to set up a model piggery that collects and treats its own slurry. The methane is harvested to provide heating fuel, while the sewage provides a powerful fertiliser. In solid form, it's sold at a profit. And the liquid is pumped for free to local farms. The remaining water is filtered until it's pure enough to return to the Yangtze.
Selling fertiliser and using methane for heating have helped make the farm economically viable. Local farmers have benefited from free fertiliser, and there's none of the usual pig farm stink.

"It's a classic people-planet-profit situation," says Philip. "These tend to be the projects that have a life of their own without the need for ongoing support from WWF."

We've been quick to communicate this success story to policy makers and industry representatives in China and beyond. Already, the provincial government is drafting a policy to replicate the model in many other farms.

This could play a huge role in restoring the wetlands and waterways of the Central and Lower Yangtze, while securing the livelihoods



of local people and improving their quality of life. Capturing the methane produced by China's 650 million pigs and reusing it as fuel will also have a significant impact in the fight against climate change.
We're working with the HSBC Climate Partnership to restore the Yangtze and other river systems. Visit wwf.org.uk/climatewater

650m
Capturing the methane from China's 650 million pigs would have a significant impact in the fight against climate change

2Bn PEOPLE
The pig population of China produces the equivalent organic waste of more than two billion people

4,000 tonnes
Our pilot project piggery will mitigate 4,000 tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions each year ­ equivalent to the emissions of more than 600 average homes in the UK

23x
Methane is 23 times more harmful as a greenhouse gas than CO2

50%
China rears half the world's pigs



10,000
Around 10,000 of the world's 25,000 known fish species live in fresh water. And we discover roughly 300 new species of freshwater fish every year

15%
Between now and 2050, the average annual flows of the world's rivers will drop by about 15%

2/3
By 2025, two thirds of the world's population are likely to suffer water shortageS


SINK OR SWIM How much longer can the planet's rivers and lakes give us the fresh water we need? Climate change, over-extraction and pollution have put many rivers in the UK and worldwide at crisis point. We need solutions. Fast.

Water is at the core of our existence. We drink it and wash with it. Billions of litres of it are used every day in farming and industry. Wildlife depends on it too.

Since 1970
populations of freshwater species
have fallen by more than a third

But our rivers and lakes are under unbearable pressure. We're taking more water than many rivers can support. We use many of the world's greatest rivers as drains for our pollution. And we're causing climate change, which increases the risk of both flooding and droughts.
The effects have already been disastrous. More than two billion people in over 40 countries endure water shortages. And since 1970, populations of freshwater species have shrunk by more than a third.

"The crisis will only deepen if things carry on like this," says Dr Dave Tickner, who heads WWF's freshwater programmes. "That's why we're leading the way in protecting our rivers and lakes. In the UK and all around the world."

1/3
a third of the uk's rivers are at
risk of severe environmental
damage

Unique habitat The UK and northern France are the only places on the planet where you'll find chalk streams. They're one of our most precious freshwater habitats. But also one of the most threatened.
The water vole, otter, kingfisher and trout all rely on them. So do many of our rarest plants, and insects such as the endangered southern damselfly. They're drawn to the steady flow of cool, clear water, rich in nutrients, which springs from the chalk. This also makes the streams an attractive source for public water supply. But as water levels drop, habitats are harmed.
"At their best, chalk streams are the most luscious, Arcadian rivers you could hope for," says TV presenter and chalk stream enthusiast, Charles Rangeley-Wilson. "But when we take too much water from them, it's like cutting off the blood supply to every living thing that depends on it."



Focus on fresh water

"WWF is making the link between the
water that comes from our taps and
the condition of the local natural
environment."
Dave Tickner

A third of rivers in the UK ­ and over half in the south of England ­ are now at risk of severe environmental damage because we're taking too much water from them. A changing UK population is only making matters worse. And as the climate warms we may all use more water for showers and to water our gardens. It all means our rivers are on the edge of survival.
But there is hope. Rivers on the Edge, a project WWF launched this year with support from HSBC, is showing how rivers can come back from the brink.

We're working in a number of ways to reduce the amount of water extracted from three chalk streams in south-east England. By helping local people to waste less water. By working with water companies to introduce water efficiency schemes. And by getting together with government and regulators to ensure the right incentives are in place to use water more sustainably.

"We need to be wise with water to keep our rivers flowing for wildlife ­ it's that simple," says Dave Tickner. "WWF is making the link between the water that comes from our taps and the condition of the local natural environment."

58x Using less Our use of water in the UK isn't only affecting our own rivers. We're contributing to the international freshwater crisis too.

We consume about 30 times more in `virtual' water than in our domestic water use (that's enough
to fill 58 bathtubs)

How so? Every person in the UK uses about 150 litres of water a day for cooking, cleaning and drinking. But we consume about 30 times as much each day (that's enough to fill 58 bathtubs) in `virtual' water. Our food and clothes are the main culprits. And a lot of the production takes place in the developing world.
It's important to take all of this into account when calculating our total impact (or footprint) on rivers and lakes.
"It's also especially vital for companies that rely on a constant water supply to understand that water scarcity is a growing business risk," says Dave Tickner. "If they do, they're far more likely to support WWF's efforts to safeguard rivers and lakes across the world."

In the past year, we've teamed up with companies whose operations and supply chains use large amounts of water. For example, we helped Marks & Spencer and SABMiller to measure the water



footprints of certain products. This is an important first step towards assessing how much the companies rely on water from different river basins around the world. And thus the risk this poses not only to the companies but also to local communities and these freshwater ecosystems.

Next, we'll be working with these and other businesses to improve the way rivers are managed in areas we've identified as being at risk.

We're also focusing on water-guzzling crops in parts of the world where water is already scarce.

40-50%
less water used on
sugar crops

In India, for example, sugarcane takes up 4% of the land in Maharashtra state but uses 60% of the state's irrigation supply. Water here is used twice as fast as nature can replace it. So we're working here and elsewhere in the Indian sub-continent to reduce the amount of water and pesticides used in growing crops for sugar, cotton and rice.
The results are impressive. One of our initiatives, with support from the European Commission, reduced water use for sugar crops by 40-50%. And yields actually rose.

1/3
ONLY A THIRD OF THE WORLD'S 177 LARGE
RIVERS ARE FREE OF DAMS OR
OTHER BARRIERS

A world of good A lot of our work might focus on projects in a particular locality. But we don't forget the big picture. The decisions made nationally and internationally by politicians and businesses can help or hinder our work. So we do our best to influence them.
For example, this year we've helped the World Bank take more account of climate change and ecosystems in its water management work. We're also calling for the enforcement of a UN convention on rivers that flow through more than one country. This will help ensure that countries work together for the long-term health of a river, and not allow conflicts of interest to cloud their judgement.

"I've worked on freshwater issues at WWF for the past nine years," says Dave Tickner. "The global crisis hasn't gone away. But we've achieved some remarkable results. We're now better placed than ever before to meet the challenges ahead."




FARMERS AND Kenya's Lake Bogoria. Another country, another water crisis FLAMINGOS ­ and another chance for us to change the future for the better.
Thousands of people depend on the rivers and wetlands around Lake Bogoria for their drinking water, crops and livestock. In short, their survival. Endangered greater kudu, lesser and greater flamingo and black-necked grebe also rely on these waters. Up to two million birds can be found on the lake at any one time.

But an influx of people and more agriculture in recent years has reduced or stopped flows into the lake for months at a time. Silt is building up in its streams, and pollution is decreasing the quality.

"When WWF began working in this area,
there was regular conflict between
people ­ sometimes violent ­ over water
use. If we'd left this unchecked, it would have spelled disaster
for local people and wildlife."
Daniel Koros

"When WWF began working in this area, there was regular conflict between people ­ sometimes violent ­ over water use. If we'd left this unchecked, it would have spelled disaster for local people and wildlife," says Daniel Koros from our Kenya office.
As well as helping to resolve conflicts, we've been tackling water scarcity here since 1996. Working with the Kenya water authority we're monitoring water use and preventing illegal use.
We've shown people at the upper reaches of the river why the flow has been affected. They're now determined to restore it.
We've helped farmers reduce the need for water and fertiliser by promoting use of a more efficient `drip' method of crop irrigation.
We've also helped to construct more than 600 `pan dams' so that farms can store rainwater and use it in the dry season to irrigate crops and water their livestock. These ponds are stocked with fish that allow people to boost their income.

"Today, people in the area appreciate that the way they use and manage their land and water has an impact on those living downstream, and on the lake," adds Daniel. "They have the knowledge and desire to protect water and wildlife, not least because they now receive a share of the revenue generated by tourists coming to the Lake Bogoria National Reserve."

This year Kenya suffered a severe drought. So it's a measure of our success that the River Waseges, which feeds the lake, flowed throughout the dry season for the first time in 10 years.



Algal blooms on Kenya's Lake Bogoria, caused by the use of agricultural fertilisers upstream, could kill off the food sources of birds such as these endangered lesser flamingos. Today, thanks to our input, people in the area have the knowledge and desire to protect both water and wildlife.

panda meets green dragon
This year we topped a survey of charitable organisations that leading UK companies turn to for environmental advice. So was there a meeting of minds when our chief executive David Nussbaum met entrepreneur Deborah Meaden?
You may well know Deborah as a panellist on Dragons' Den, the BBC's flagship show about investing in new business ideas. Perhaps less well known is that she's a WWF ambassador ­ giving her time freely to support our work. This includes exchanging ideas with our chief executive on the importance of business innovation in tackling the big environmental concerns of the day. And how we can engage with businesses and challenge them to change their practices. Here's what happened...
Watch a short film of this discussion at wwf.org.uk/deborahdavid

Discussion: business sustainability
David: We believe in working with business ­ it has a hugely important role if we're to solve the environmental and sustainability issues we face. Are there particular things you've seen that have moved the business agenda in relation to the environment?
Deborah: I've seen a considerable change over the last two or three years. There is more talk about the genuine impact the environment is having on business. We've got a moment in time here where business issues are completely aligned with environmental issues. Once you realise that this can help your profitability, it gets into the boardroom. Utopia to me would be "of course we're green ­ it's crazy not to be".
WWF has a huge remit, and can deal with longer-term issues. Are you finding that businesses are becoming more engaged when they understand this?
David: Oh absolutely. I think major forward-looking businesses are conscious they want to be in business not just this year but for the long term. That's why there's quite often an alignment between us and business because we can see that. It's similar for us: we've got to focus on immediate needs. But we've also got to make sure that there's a long-term future.
For me, it's summarised in four words: people and nature thrive. That's what we want. So we're looking for imaginative ways of creating economic and environmental sustainability for people and nature.
Deborah: I'm certainly beginning to see it. I'm seeing more genuinely innovative products than I think I've seen in the last 10 years. It feels to me like a moment of dawning. Are you experiencing a surge in technological innovation?
David: Yes. We see a lot of that, driven often by business because business is an engine of innovation. For example, we were looking at turtles being accidentally caught in fishing. Somebody came up with a fish hook shaped in a way that wouldn't catch turtles, so we provided some of these hooks free to fishermen. They got convinced. And then, there's a business opportunity for better fish hooks to be provided. So, finding innovative ways to solve problems that are a win for both sides has to be the right solution.


Deborah: The perception out there is still that WWF is just about the animals ­ the tiger, the panda. How are you going to overcome that?

Watch a short film of this discussion at wwf.org.uk/ deborahdavid

David: Partly we do it by making the links. We help people understand ­ if you want the animal, you need the habitat; if you want the habitat, we've got to protect it. So, for example, we've got to make sure the way business is getting its resources is really sustainable. I think smart business people have to be conscious that they are being entrusted with the world's resources.
Deborah: It ends up being quite a simple message: our world matters ­ what are we going to do about it?

WWF-UK tops business survey

This year, we were named leaders in a survey of charitable organisations that major UK companies turn to for environmental advice. We scored highly on `thought leadership', communication, awareness-building, advisory services, partnerships and investment in sustainability projects outside the UK. The survey was carried out by Verdantix ­ an independent research firm that specialises in commercial analysis of climate change, sustainability and energy issues.

WWF ambassadors

WWF ambassadors are distinguished and influential people who have significantly contributed to their profession or field of expertise, and who are committed to WWF's mission. We greatly appreciate their advice as well as their participation in and promotion of our work.

Sir David Attenborough, OM, CH, CVO, CBE, FRS, Richard Aylard, CVO, Simon Burall, The Hon James Buxton, Field Marshal Sir John Chapple, GCB, CBE, DL (Chairman), Will Day, John Elkington, Ben Fogle, Sir Stelios Haji-Ioannou, Sir John Houghton CBE, FRS, The Rt Rev James Jones, DD, DL, Lord Bishop of Liverpool, Peter Jones, Clare Kerr, Sir Richard Kleinwort, Bt, Kevin McCloud, Alistair McGowan, Deborah Meaden, Sir Mervyn Pedelty (died 26 January 2010), Simon Pepper, OBE, Stephen Poliakoff, CBE, Jonathon Porritt, CBE, Lewis Gordon Pugh, Miranda Richardson, Professor Callum Roberts, Nick Ross.




year of the tiger
In the last century, tiger numbers have plummeted from 100,000 to as few as 3,200. Poaching, illegal trade and loss of habitat continue to cause huge problems. And the impacts of climate change are adding to the threat.
So we're launching a bold campaign in 2010 ­ the Chinese year of the tiger. Our target: to double wild tiger numbers by the next year of the tiger, in 2022.
We've been working on tiger conservation projects for many years, but the current critical situation means we need effective action on an even bigger scale. And we believe the right momentum is building across all 13 countries where wild tigers live.
"Never before has there been such an ambitious plan and high-level commitment from governments to double wild tiger numbers," says Diane Walkington, who heads our species work. "If there's real commitment to help us protect the tigers' habitats and prevent poaching of tigers and their prey, we're confident that their numbers can recover quickly."

Fundraising

Raising support We made good progress in raising funds, despite the challenges of an ongoing crisis in the world economy. We've spent more, but it's paying off. More than double the number of new supporters joined us this year than in the previous 12 months. We now have 266,000 people giving us a regular gift ­ the highest figure we've achieved to date. Their ongoing support is invaluable and greatly appreciated.

We've come up with lots of different ways to engage supporters and boost our income. Fundraising through the internet and social media has gone well, as have our new direct response television adverts. And we've seen increases in the numbers of people giving us other forms of support ­ particularly online campaigners. Politicians listen when they receive thousands of emails asking for action on a particular issue. So, for example, the 105,000 people who signed up online to support WWF's Earth Hour 2009 ensured it had an even greater impact.


A lasting legacy

Sir peter scott: In 2009, we celebrated the centenary of Sir Peter Scott's birth.

a celebration He was an Olympic yachtsman. A popular

television presenter. A gliding champion.

A painter of repute. A naturalist. A skipper

"We shan't save in the Americas Cup. The son of a national hero. The founding

all we should like chairman of WWF.

to ­ but we shall save a great deal more than if we had
never tried."
Sir Peter Scott

It's hard to imagine a life better spent. He was passionate about nature and conservation, and deeply concerned about the planet's ability to withstand human demands on its resources. Another of his driving interests was preserving the Antarctic wilderness from human exploitation. Hardly surprising: his father was the legendary

Robert Falcon Scott ­ Scott of the Antarctic.

Sir Peter Scott was appointed a Fellow of the Royal Society and created a Companion of Honour by the Queen in 1987. He died two years later at the age of 79.

His legacy lives on, through WWF's numerous worldwide programmes.

If the story of Sir Peter Scott inspires you, perhaps you would consider leaving a legacy of your own. You can help protect the future of our world with a gift in your will to WWF, the organisation he cofounded nearly half a century ago. You'll help us tackle issues such as climate change, protect endangered habitats and safeguard the future of animals on the verge of extinction.

As Sir Peter himself said: "We shan't save all we should like to ­ but we shall save a great deal more than if we had never tried."

We would like to pay tribute to everyone who remembered us in their wills, and to friends and relatives who made memorial donations. Every legacy is of great value to our work. The following people left especially generous bequests during the year:
Miss I Aird, Miss SJ Baines, Mr GA Baxter, Miss DL Blay, Miss L Broomhead, Mrs EM Burr, Miss HA Chatterton, Mr PM Durman, Miss BJ Epton, Miss AC Gill, Dr CJ Hemming, Mr AS James, Mr RA Jeffery, Miss AM Knights, Miss BP Lincoln, Miss JK Miller, Mrs JM Pemberton, Mrs M-A Shanks, Mrs OJ Sherwood, Mrs D Skidmore, Mr N Skidmore, Mr H Snape, Mr RFA Spooner, Mr M Surtees, Miss T Thomas.



inspiring by Cutting our air travel. Burning wood pellets to keep us warm. example Reducing our use of paper. It's not glamorous. But all of it helps us reduce our own environmental impact as much as we can.

94%

As our annual review shows, we address threats to the planet in many ways. Lobbying governments to tackle issues such as climate change and illegal logging. Pressing business to cut flights, avoid dirty fuels, and assess and reduce their water footprints. And encouraging local communities in the developing world to help safeguard habitats and wildlife.

94% of the wood and paper products we
used were from Forest Stewardship Council certified recycled post-consumer waste

But we're well aware we have our own impact on the environment. So we're doing our utmost to reduce this to an absolute minimum.
As an organisation that works all over the world, inevitably we have to get on planes to support our field programmes or to lobby at important international meetings. But we also recognise that, like many other organisations, we need to reduce our air travel. So we've joined our own One in Five Challenge (see page 36) to cut one in five of our flights within five years.

We've also imposed tough targets on ourselves to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions from travel. Our commitment was to cut emissions by 5% this year and in each of the coming years. We've got off to a flying start ­ achieving a 26% reduction in emissions from air travel compared with the previous year, thanks to the commitment of our staff. They now use the train for most UK and close European destinations, and our web-based conferencing system has proved very popular.

We've managed to cut our energy use by 5%, thanks to unglamorous but effective changes such as installing new eco hand-driers and using clever technology that ensures our electrical equipment consumes less energy and runs more efficiently. And at our Scotland office we cut our gas use by 90% thanks to a new boiler fuelled by wood pellets.

We've also reduced the amount of paper we use in the office by 30%. This was due in part to new software that means staff can only print documents when they go to the printer.



We regard carbon offsetting as a last resort ­ only after reducing, reusing and recycling. But for the fourth year running, we've offset our unavoidable emissions by investing in gold standard carbon offset schemes.
We hope that by challenging ourselves in these and many other ways, we'll be even better placed to inspire others to make positive changes to their ways of life.

positive change
For three decades, our iconic collection boxes helped to make the panda the instantly recognisable face of conservation. And they've collected huge amounts of small change. Just one of many ways countless people have shown us their ongoing support.
We rely on such generosity to continue our work. Each and every penny you donate helps us to achieve positive changes, such as those featured in this review. Thank you.
Our collection boxes were retired in 2007. But this year we challenged 16 British artists, including Sir Peter Blake, Jason Bruges, Tracey Emin, Jim Lambie and Sir Paul Smith, to reinvent the pandas. An auction of the artworks, which we exhibited in Selfridges, London, raised nearly £100,000 to support our work.
See the artists discussing their reinventions of the WWF panda at wwf.org.uk/pandamonium

