

Sunday, December 13, 2015 • 17:04Z

Financial Times (web site) • 574 words

Science may hold key to hitting
climate targets

Clive Cookson, Science Editor

To achieve the grand ambitions set out in the Paris climate accord will require huge changes over the next few decades in the energy sources we use for transport, heating, lighting and the provision of goods and services.

With global temperatures already 0.9C above pre-industrial levels, restraining the overall rise this century to 1.5C - the new aspiration - is monumentally challenging, climate scientists say. But they are generally reluctant to sound too negative about a political agreement that is better than most had expected.

"Some are saying that 1.5C is an impossible target - it is not," says Piers Forster, professor of climate change at Leeds University. But Professor Kevin Anderson of Manchester University warns: "There is only a slim chance of maintaining the global temperature rise even to below 2C."

Progress will depend on financial incentives to wean the world economy off fossil fuels, combined with intensive research and development of non-carbon energy sources. The economic challenge is to find a way to levy a substantial "carbon fee" through a market mechanism and/or taxation, which would raise the cost of coal, oil and gas while demand for them was falling.

The scientific and technical challenge is to continue to drive down the cost of alternative sources, particularly solar and wind power but also nuclear, while improving the technology for distributing and storing energy.

Perhaps the greatest need is for better batteries that store electricity with much higher density and charge up much more quickly than those available today. They would not only solve the "intermittency problem" of solar and wind power but also enable electric vehicles to surpass the range and performance of petrol and diesel engines.

For shipping and particularly air travel it will be harder for alternative fuels to beat the convenience of liquid hydrocarbons. While manufacturers such as Airbus are beginning to experiment with electric aircraft, these are unlikely to replace liquid-fuelled airliners for several decades. However plant-derived biofuels may be able to substitute for fossil fuels in transport.

For people living in sunnier parts of the world, only a relatively modest improvement in technology would be required for a combination of solar-photovoltaic cells and night-time battery storage to provide an economic and reliable household electricity supply. They could then leave the main electric grid or choose to feed power into it.

On nuclear power, many scientists part company with the green campaigners with whom they have made common cause on other issues during the UN climate negotiations. They see a new generation of smaller and less expensive nuclear power stations - downsized from today's multibillion-dollar monsters - as a valuable contribution to non-carbon electricity generation. In the long run there could be a role for nuclear fusion reactors.

In a future carbon-neutral world, any power stations built to burn coal, oil and gas will have to scrub carbon-dioxide out of their emissions through carbon capture and storage technology. Whether this can be achieved in a practical and affordable way remains to be seen.

However all these measures may not be enough on their own to limit global warming to 1.5C. Prof Anderson warns that success may eventually depend on "highly speculative "negative emission" technologies" that absorb immense quantities of carbon dioxide from the atmosphere many decades from now. 