United Nations Development ProgrammeBlending Climate Finance Through National Climate FundsA Guide book for the Design and Establishment of National Funds to Achieve Climate Change Priorities
 UNDP is the UN's global development network, advocating for change and connecting countries to knowledge, experience and resources to help people build a better life. UNDP has a presence in 176 countries and territories, working with them on their own solutions to global and national development challenges. As they develop local capacity, they draw on the people of UNDP and our wide range of partners. All rights reserved. This publication or parts of it may not be reproduced, stored by means of any system or transmitted, in any form or by any medium, whether electronic, mechanical, photocopied, recorded or of any other type, without the prior permission of the author or the United Nations Development Programme. The views and recommendations expressed in this report are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of UNDP, the United Nations or its Member States. The boundaries and names shown and the designations used on maps do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations. Sole responsibility is taken for errors of omission or commission. Design: Anvil Creative Group (NY, www.anvilcreativegroup.com) Production: A.K. Office Supplies (NY)


ForewordClimate change is one of the most pressing threats to development today. Addressing climate change requires that countries transform their economies and grow in a different way — climate and development planning must be integrated so that policies and actions across multiple sectors and scales lower greenhouse gas emissions, reduce vulnerability to climate shocks and deliver poverty reduction gains.The good news is that countries have new and expanded opportunities to finance climate change actions — billions from the public and private sectors will be channeled toward climate activities. In order for countries to take advantage of these opportunities, however, the right institutional and financial mechanisms must be in place so that resources are directed efficiently toward national climate and development priorities.An important tool for countries to manage climate finance is a National Climate Fund NCFs are nation- ally-driven and nationally-owned funds that help countries to collect climate finance from a variety of sources, coordinate them, blend them together and aoiount for them. In this way, countries are in the driving seat and can make informed choices fo r how direct resources toward activities that deliver results on the groundThis guidebook is part of a series of practical guida nee documents and toolkits to support national and sub-national governments to achieve low-emission, climate-resilient development It provides information based on UNDP's decades of experience in delivering climate change programming in order to help countries design and establish an NCF that is tailored to their priorities and builds on existing governance, policy and fiscal framework and systerrs.It is my hope that this guidebook will contribute to the ongoing efforts of countries to manage climate change finance and that it will support countries to be more equipped to achieve transformational change whereby positive develop ment and poverty reduction are achieved and sustained over time.Veerla VandeweerdDirectorEnvironments Energy GroupUnited Nations Development ProgrammeNationaI Climate Fund s: AGuüebook for Decision-Makers

• Purpose of Guidebook• Target Audience• Structure of Report
OverviewOverviewBy pledging $30 billion in climate change finance by 2012 and up to $100 billion annually by 2020, governments have ushered in a new era of funding for climate change. Only ten years ago, climate finance was managed by a small number of large funds associated with the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) process. Today, there has been an explosion of public, private, bilateral and multilateral sources that offer countries new opportunities to address their climate and development needs.While this new landscape of climate change funds provides increased resources, it also brings increased complexity. Requirements, processes and reporting can differ among the funds and countries are faced with the challenge of identifying which funds are appropriate for them, how to collect resources, how to blend them together, how to coordinate the actions funded by them and how to develop the methods to monitor and evaluate the results. Given the diversity of funds, it is critical that countries can build on existing institutions and programmes to manage resources at the national level to support country- driven objectives.One tool that can help countries respond to these challenges is a National Climate Fund (NCF). An NCF is a mechanism that supports countries to manage their engagement with climate finance by facilitating the collection, blending, coordination of, and accounting for climate finance. NCFs provide a country- driven system that can support climate change goal setting and strategic programming, oversee climate change project approval, measure project implementation and performance, offer policy assurance and financial control of climate change funds and assist with partnership management. NCFs help countries to blend various resources together at the national level, providing a mechanism for shifting power away from traditional top-down fund management to country-level management. A country's climate change objectives are managed and supported from the inside out, not the other way around.Designing an NCF requires carefully considering its objectives and then crafting a structure that supports the achievement of these objectives. Many NCFs deliver a common set of services, however the exact components and structures to deliver the services vary greatly according to national circumstances and priorities. In other words, the way in which the fund's components are designed shapes how the NCF delivers its support. For example, an NCF capitalized by international and national public finance will collect and blend resources differently that an NCF that relies only on private finance. Tailored fiscal tools and mechanisms will be required to access and channel public and private sources effectively. Further, depending on its capitalization modalities, an NCF may aim to strengthen capacities of national stake holders, including for direct access to climate finance.
OverviewA key lesson learned from UNDP's experience in administering over 750 funds around the world, and in providing trustee and administrative agent services for over $5 billion in multi-donor trust funds, is that a National Climate Fund must be carefully designed to align with national objectives and capacities on climate change. To accomplish this, the design and administration of an NCF can demand extensive time, effort and resources. While this guidebook does not focus on if a country should establish an NCF, it does help countries deepen their understanding of the design choices that are critical to successful NCFs. In the pages that follow, countries can identify the scope and scale of an NCF that matches their needs and priorities and decide if an NCF is right for them.It is UNDP's hope that this guidebook will help countries to make the most out of the expanding climate change finance landscape. Well-designed NCFs can better equip countries to blend domestic and international, public and private, and concessional loan and grant climate finance at the national level. In this way, NCFs can help countries achieve results and more efficiently and effectively support the transition toward low-emission and climate-resilient development.Purpose of GuidebookThe purpose of this guidebook is to assist countries in designing a National Climate Fund. It leverages UNDP's experience with funds at the global, regional, national and sub-national levels and shares lessons learned about designing and administering NCFs. It also aims to provide a simple, robust and transparent method for meaningful stakeholder engagement throughout the design process.Target AudienceThe principle audience for this publication is the decision-maker at the national and sub-national levels, as well as domestic and international experts involved in assisting governments in establishing institutions and frameworks to support the management and delivery of climate finance.Structure of GuidebookThe guidebook is divided into three parts. Chapter 1 provides an overview of NCFs, including the basic goals and functions. Chapter 2 provides a process for designing an NCF, including identifying the objectives, capitalization, governance, fiduciary management, implementation arrangements and monitoring, reporting and verification (MRV) structures and systems. Each of these components is accompanied by a series of targeted questions that facilitates decision-making for that component. Chapter 2 also describes UNDP's approach for consolidating stakeholder input by creating a term sheet. Chapter 3 describes UNDP's management and advisory services, and the implementation assistance offered by UNDP. Chapter 4 provides a conclusion and Chapter 5 presents five sample term sheets. The Annex includes a glossary and list of useful resources and websites.


Chapter 1: Overview of National Climate FundsOverview of National Climate Funds1.1 | Climate Finance LandscapeClimate change is regarded as a key environment and development challenge for the 21st century. Affecting every continent, climate change impacts threaten to undo progress made toward poverty reduction and the achievement of the Millennium Development Goals. Governments agree that business- as-usual development will not suffice — countries need a new way forward that helps their economies grow in a manner that acknowledges the pressing reality of climate change. Countries must transition toward a new paradigm that supports low-emission, climate-resilient development, shifts production and consumption processes to emit fewer greenhouse gases and promotes sustainable development.Ushering in a new development paradigm requires a dramatic increase in climate change finance. Recognizing this, governments gathered at the UNFCCC Climate Change Conference in Cancun and pledged $30 billion in "fast start" funding — climate funds pledged between 2010 and 2012 — and up to $100 billion annually by 2020. These pledges have been matched by an explosion of public and private funds outside of the UNFCCC process, offering countries new resources to undertake climate change mitigation and adaptation actions. UNDP estimates that, taken together, there are already more than 50 international public funds, 45 carbon markets and 6,000 private equity funds providing climate change finance.1 Each of these public, private, bilateral and multilateral sources offers new opportunities for countries to address their climate and development needs.The increase in climate change funding opportunities makes it important for countries to consider how to attract and leverage different types of climate change investment, including that from private sources. The International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that about 40% of the global additional investment needed in climate change finance in 2020 will come from private households, 40% from businesses and the remaining 20% from government.2 With private sector funds outnumbering government funds by an enormous margin, a key challenge for countries will be to use scarce public funds to attract private investment. Public funds — such as those under the UNFCCC — must be leveraged in strategic ways to attract new resources from the private sector.The dramatic increase in opportunities to access climate finance is matched by equally increasing complexity. The requirements, processes and reporting associated with the many funds can be confusing and overwhelming. Countries are faced with the challenge of how to identify which funds are appropriate for them, how to coordinate the actions funded by them,and how to develop the methods to monitor and evaluate the results.2 Further, countries must also figure out ways to blend funds together so that multiple sources can support climate change initiatives. This will be necessary to finance a complete transformation toward low-emission and climate-resilient development.

Chapter 1: Overview of National Climate Funds1.2 Key Goals of a National Climate FundOne tool that countries can use to meet this challenge is a National Climate Fund (NCF). NCFs are a mechanism that supports countries to direct finance toward climate change projects and programmes. The key goals of an NCF are the collection, blending, and coordination, as well as strengthening national ownership, of climate finance (Figure 2). Each of these goals can be tailored to support country-driven climate change priorities based on national circumstances and realities. NCFs can also serve as a gateway for enhanced capacity building and knowledge sharing among stakeholders.The NCF's four goals provide the foundation for its programmatic and operational components. First, by collecting and distributing funds to climate change activities that promote national priorities, an NCFprovides a unified engagement point where the government, donors, development partners, civil society and other stakeholders can engage on and make decisions about climate change issues.Moreover, while traditional mechanisms under the UNFCCC are limited to collecting donor funds or resources under the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM), an NCF can attract a more diverse variety of sources of climate financing. Public, private, multilateral and bilateral funds, as well as innovative sources, can be collected by an NCF for coordinated and streamlined results.Second, an NCF facilitates the blending of public, private, multilateral and bilateral sources of climate finance. It is rare that one or two funds would be able to cover the costs necessary to transition and entire economy toward low-emission, climate-resilient development. Rather, countries must blend together multiple sources — public, private, multilateral, bilateral — in a coordinated and streamlined way that is strategic and can further catalyze more resources to support action on climate change.NCFs can be designed to complement and blend sources from the emerging global public climate change financial system. The Global Environment Facility, Adaptation Fund and the emerging Green Climate Fund will each collect resources and direct them toward climate projects at the regional, national and subnational level. National Climate Funds are not meant to duplicate these financial flows, collect funds from them or increase the burden on countries and implementing entities. Rather, NCFs provide a mechanism that can blend these resources with others resources at the project level. NCFs can provide the means for leveraging public funds to attract private funds and provide national-level coordination among and alongside the global climate finance system.Third, NCFs can coordinate country-wide climate change activities. The NCF mechanism responds to the need to provide flexible, coordinated and predictable funding to support the achievement of national priorities on climate change and development. In their structure and operations, NCFs are consistent with several principles of the Paris Declaration on Aid Effectiveness and the Accra Agenda for Action, including national ownership and alignment with national priorities; harmonization and coordination; effective and inclusive partnerships; and achieving development results and accounting for them.
1.3 I Common Functions of a National Climate FundOnce a country decides to establish an NCF, stakeholders must identify the specific and necessary functions of the NCF. Functions should build upon existing mechanisms and systems that support action on climate change. They can include goal setting, strategic programming, capitalization, partnership management, project approval, policy assurance, financial control and performance measurement. Each should be considered carefully. The functions of an NCF influence its components and services. An NCF with ill-designed functions runs the risk of not only failing to reach its goals, but of undermining progress toward low-emission, climate-resilient development.In UNDP's experience, there are a number of core functions that are common to any funding mechanism, including NCFs. First, an NCF should enhance or provide a system that supports goal setting and the development of programmatic strategies on climate change. By setting in place a process that aligns and supports existing general goals and strategic programmes, the NCF can provide a coordinated supporting structure to a country's national climate and development priorities. Further, by facilitating regular discussions and stakeholder engagement on national climate issues, an NCF can serve as a central body for discussion and decision-making about how the NCF will support national action.An NCF should provide for fundraising toward climate priorities. Indeed, the capitalization of the NCF — its ability to collect and raise funds — is one of the core functions that make an NCF a useful tool for implementing low-emission, climate-resilient development. As demonstrated in Chapter 2, capitalization can take a variety of forms and can utilize public, private, multilateral, bilateral and innovative sources of finance.An NCF can provide a mechanism for managing partnerships by clearly defining and coordinating the roles of various climate change stakeholders. The NCF can complement and support the management of relationships with other financing mechanisms, such as those under the UNFCCC or with other multilateral, bilateral, public and private sources. It can also ensure the clear management of the responsibilities of stakeholders at all levels and across climate change initiatives.NCFs can provide a coordinated project approval and implementation structure for climate change programming. Uniform project cycle guidelines that clearly outline the technical and eligibility requirements support streamlined operations. Well-conceived guidelines can facilitate the transparent approval process of NCF climate change initiatives.Moreover, an NCF can supply systems to ensure that quality standards are met throughout its operations. NCFs offer policy assurance through social and environmental safeguards, financial controls that ensure fiscal monitoring and reporting and performance measurement that outlines specific performance criteria and then evaluates projects and programmes to ensure that the NCF delivers effectively and efficiently.The NCF can become an important source of knowledge and information management that consolidates and disseminates lessons from climate change projects and programmes. The exchange of such information can build capacity, help projects implement good practices and spur innovative solutions to implement country-driven priorities on climate change.Chapter 2: Designing a National Climate Fund2.1 | Common Components and Structural 1 Overview of a National Climate FundGiven the diversity of design options, there are a number of key decisions that must be made in order to ensure that an appropriate and effective NCF structure is established that maximizes the delivery of climate finance to support national priorities. Important decisions on each component of the fund must be considered in order for an NCF to achieve the core goals and functions described in Chapter 1. Based on UNDP's experience in the administration of over 750 trust funds and more than 40 multi-donor trust funds, six common components have been identified that provide the basic skeleton for any NCF: objectives, capitalization, governance, fiduciary management, implementation arrangements and monitoring, reporting, and verification (MRV).Chapter 2 of this guidebook focuses on a step-by-step decision-making process for the design of each component. A description of each component is accompanied by a series of targeted questions that facilitate decision-making for that element. The end of Chapter 2 brings all of these decisions together into a term sheet that facilitates stakeholder engagement and consolidates stakeholder inputs on each component.NCFs are not "one-size-fits-all," but many funds arrange the components into a common structure to support the delivery of NCF services. The structure includes funding sources, governing bodies, a trustee and implementers. Funding sources provide funds to the NCF while the governing bodies make decisions about the operations of the fund. The trustee manages the transfers of funds to and from the NCF's bank account. Implementers receive funds and ensure activities are undertaken. Each of these agents supports the delivery of actions to achieve the strategic priorities of the NCF.UNDP has developed a structural overview (Figure 3) that demonstrates how these components can be arranged and the various design questions that must be answered. Resources, coordination, support and MRV flow between sources, governing bodies, the trustee, implementers and recipients. Throughout each component, stakeholders should consider how the NCF will deliver its services and what structural components and design decisions are necessary to support the achievement of the NCF's priorities.
A set of governing bodies is usually at the centre of an NCF. Often, a steering committee or other group makes decisions on the disbursal of funds and oversees the high-level activities of the fund, including policy and operational guidelines, strategic direction and reporting. This group is often made up of multiple ministries, such as environment, planning and finance, and representatives from civil society, the United Nations, development banks, private sector or other partners. The chair person of the steering committee can be a government representative or other participant. The steering committee is usually supported by two other governing bodies, a technical group that provides substantive reviews of project proposals and a secretariat that manages day-to-day operations of the NCF.In a majority of funds, resources flow from the sources to the trustee, which holds them on behalf of the NCF. When the governing bodies make decisions about how the funds should be allocated, the steering committee will direct the trustee to distribute the funds to the implementing entities. The implementers conduct the projects and the recipients receive the benefits. The implementers then report on their activities to the governing bodies. In the case of loans, the loans will be repaid back to the trustee.The NCF structure can be tailored to align with its designated functions and national priorities. Depending on the objectives of an NCF, specialized systems can be put in place to manage financial flows. For example, if a fund capitalizes national banks to provide low-cost loans for projects such as renewable energy, it may assign the government as the source of funds and the national banks the trustee. MRV would be conducted by the banks according to their lending criteria. In the case of an NCF using innovative financing mechanisms, such as taxes on bunker fuels, to support activities, the infrastructure must be set up in order to accommodate the collection and distribution of these funds. This kind of flexibility helps each entity associated with the NCF to fulfill the role that best supports the objectives of the fund.The relationship between the NCF's various bodies must be carefully defined through the design process so that each decision is implemented efficiently and promotes national climate and development objectives. The flows of funds, support and coordination of an NCF should align with its objectives so that the fund can operate smoothly.Relationships with the private sector and civil society should also be considered and clarified. In some NCFs, the private sector and/or civil society play important roles in the fund's structure, including serving as a donor, an implementer or a representative on a governing body. In cases where the private sector or a civil society group has met the necessary fiduciary standards, they can also serve as the trustee.


Importantly, NCFs must be firmly rooted in national realities. National priorities and circumstances provide an important context for NCF delivery and can lead to opportunities and challenges as an NCF becomes operational. To provide stability, NCFs should take this into account by aligning with national climate change strategies, institutions, frameworks and stakeholders; however, NCFs must also have the flexibility to adjust overtime.Maintaining both stability and flexibility is imperative to stakeholder engagement. Throughout the design phase of an NCF, stakeholder consultations are critical to ensure that the NCF is robust and effective. Including various government, multilateral, bilateral, private and civil society actors in the development and establishment of the NCF helps to more clearly identify needs and requirements and to accommodate best practices.
Programmatic and Management Objectives

As a first step in setting up an NCF, a country must identify its strategic goals on climate change and how the NCF will help it to achieve these goals. The NCF may serve the country by driving resources to national climate activities, such as mitigation, adaptation, reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation (REDD), capacity building, technology building or other priorities. An NCF’s objectives may also include attracting private sector investment, or formalizing a system to collect resources from “polluter pays” policies that collect revenue from industry.
An NCF’s objectives provide the foundation for its operations and outcomes. When setting objectives, a country should take into account its national climate and development strategies, as well as other analyses and plans, such as the National Communications, National Adaptation Programmes of Action (NAPAs), National Adaptation Plans (NAPs) and Nationally-Appropriate Mitigation Actions (NAMAs), to identify the priorities of a National Climate Fund. These analyses can bring together current thinking on climate change, as well as focus the NCF on priority issues and sectors where activities can be undertaken in a cost-effective way.
It is critical that objectives take into account the technical and political considerations that may support or hamper the NCF’s progress over time. Thematic priorities, such as increasing renewable energy, must be supported by analyses of the feasibility of increasing investment in that sector. Likewise, to achieve other priorities of the NCF, such as capacity building for direct access to climate funds under the UNFCCC, these aims must be acknowledged, and appropriate and supportive systems be put in place.
Carefully defined objectives must be supported by appropriate functions of the NCF. If an NCF focuses on providing a type of “clearing house” for climate change initiatives, it may not be necessary to develop a complicated financial mechanism. Likewise, if an NCF is to provide low-cost loans to a specific sector, it would not be necessary for the functions of the fund to include extensive coordination systems. A country can select the objectives that match its priorities but must ensure that the objectives are fully supported by the NCF's functions.
ALIGNING OBJECTIVES WITH OTHER PRIORITIES AND FUNDING WINDOWS
These programmatic considerations should be linked closely with fund management considerations and, importantly, how the NCF will relate to other international and domestic climate funds. Some countries may have multiple NCFs that target specific issues — for example, one to provide funding for REDD activities and another for adaptation. Others NCFs may be linked to more comprehensive, national strategies. In Ethiopia, the Carbon-Neutral, Climate-Resilient Economy mission statement sets out how Ethiopia is responding to climate change and how it can transition toward low-carbon growth. The government is considering setting up a national fund to support these activities. The NCF could be a funding arm and all activities under the NCF would link to Ethiopia's mission statement. In this model, the national strategy becomes the roadmap for the NCF.The scope of the NCF must fully support its programmatic mission. If a country has already acquired funds from a specific source, or funds have been earmarked for a specific activity, then it will be important to ensure that the structure of the NCF can channel this funding appropriately. Similarly, if a country's goals are to optimize its relationships with stakeholders (e.g., the private sector) or funding programmes (e.g., the Clean Development Mechanism) it may be necessary to codify this in the objectives.
FUND TIMELINEDesigning an NCF's objectives must also consider timelines. If a national strategy or other funding mechanism is time-bound, this may affect the timeframe of the NCF. This will be especially important as countries consider their options under the UNFCCC process. For example, if an NCF is designed to attract fast start funding, it is important to align the NCF with the 2012 deadline. Likewise, the longer-term pledges of up to $100 billion per year by 2020 include a variety of sources, including private finance, and an NCF may wish to accommodate these circumstances accordingly. Other NCFs may wish to align themselves with the specific timeframe of a national strategy.CRITICAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR DEFINING THE OBJECTIVES:1. What are the national priorities on climate change? Are there short, medium or long-term strategies that the NCF should support (including national strategies, NAMAs, etc.)?2. Will the fund focus on thematic priorities (e.g., renewable energy) or support broader objectives?3. How will the objectives of the fund relate to the objectives of other international and domestic funds?4. What timeframe is most appropriate? Should the NCF be time-bound?5. What are the expected financial flows to the fund? Have funds already been pledged? Have these funds been earmarked toward a specific activity that should be acknowledged?6. Are there stakeholders that must be acknowledged in the objectives? (e.g., those associated with a specific industry)7. Should the objectives acknowledge a relationship with an entity or programme?(e.g., Clean Development Mechanism)Building on the fund’s objectives, a country should consider the types of resources that would best capitalize the fund. Indeed, deciding where the funds will come from is one of the most important choices that will shape the NCF. Many sources of finance — including international, national, public and private — can be delivered through an NCF, but they must build on existing frameworks and be supported by appropriate structures to access and channel funding efficiently.
LINKING OBJECTIVES AND CAPITALIZATION
Fund capitalization must be realistic, grounded in the objectives and functions of the NCF. Funds with ambitious objectives must have clear expectations of how the fund will be capitalized and the objectives supported. Designers of NCFs should exercise caution in this regard: expectations of co-financing and leveraging must be based on national circumstances. Likewise, funds with smaller, targeted objectives should not aim to access billions when it is not appropriate for the scope of the NCF.
Generally, if a fund has a broad set of objectives, it usually blends together a broader array of sources than more targeted NCFs. An NCF with wide objectives — for example, supporting all of the activities under a low-emission, climate-resilient development strategy — may aim to collect funds from international and national sources so that a wide variety of activities can be covered. A fund with a more targeted mission will often only focus on a single source, such as those from one bilateral partner.
INNOVATIVE FINANCING MECHANISMSA country may also want to consider the use of innovative financing mechanisms to provide capital for an NCF. In this case, an NCF is designed to collect resources from non-traditional sources of finance such as levies on oil or coal production, fees from polluting companies or proceeds from carbon markets. Revenues from these sources are collected by an NCF and then directed toward the programmes and projects that fulfill the goals of the NCF. For example, the Brazil National Fund on Climate Change collects funds from revenue from the oil production industry and channels them toward climate change mitigation and adaptation activities.Innovative mechanisms require that complementary structures be put in place within the NCF to ensure the efficient collection and delivery of funds. NCFs should have the ability to manage and account for funds coming from these non-traditional sources.
CONSIDERING CONTEXTWith both traditional and innovative sources, it is critical to consider national circumstances in order to optimize capitalization. Laws or policies may be required to access and collect certain types of funding. A tax on an industry, for example, may need to be mandated by a national law that clarifies the rates of taxation.Understanding and acknowledging national circumstances is especially important when considering the involvement of the private sector. By aligning with existing private sector regulations and incentive structures, for example, the NCF can stimulate and attract private investment by driving public finance toward commercially attractive projects. This helps the NCF to contribute toward sound investment and policy decisions that direct private finance toward activities that address national climate and development priorities.A country should also consider any available resources that could already feed directly into the NCF or any existing partnerships with donors. A country may wish for the NCF to absorb these resources or partnerships, or to align with them so that activities will be undertaken in a coordinated manner. If the NCF does absorb them, it is important to note whether they are "earmarked" toward specific activities — such as capacity building — that will affect the operations of the fund.The capitalization of the fund has implications for the size, governance and implementation of the fund. For example, if the private sector provides resources to the fund, then it may be necessary to include private sector representatives in the governance system. Furthermore, a number of legal contracts or systems will need to be established in order to collect resources from specific sources. For innovative funds, enacting laws, policies or partnership agreements may also be necessary for the efficient capitaliza- tion of an NCF.
Countries should also consider how additional resources will be raised throughout the life of the fund. Some NCFs use a regular fundraising cycle while others adopt the cycles associated with specific sources.
CRITICAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR IDENTIFYING CAPITALIZATION:
1. Based on the objectives of the fund, what kinds of sources will be blended together to capitalize the NCF?
2. Will the fund utilize innovative sources, such as levies?
3. Will donor funds be allocated to specific activities? (e.g., capacity building, institutional
strengthening, investment)
4. Are there any existing sources that could readily feed into an NCF?
5. Will the size and sources of capitalization impact the size, governance or implementing arrangements of the fund?
6. Are there specific structures necessary to support the fund’s capitalization? (e.g., laws or policies, partnership agreements)
7. Will there be a regular process or cycle for raising funds? How will additional sources be attracted?
Building on the objectives and capitalization of the NCF, countries must identify the appropriate governance system that will optimize the fund's performance. Establishing governing bodies, decision-making processes and oversight can facilitate efficient management of the fund in order to drive resources toward implementation.First, a country must consider the scope of the NCF's governance. If the NCF has a horizontal structure, the governance system should be inclusive of stakeholders and provide coordination among partners. If the NCF is a vertical institution, the governance arrangements may require more stringent reporting and management structures.GOVERNING BODIESAs discussed previously, many NCFs have a set of governing bodies that make decisions on fund management and strategic direction. The bodies within the governance system must have clear roles that effectively support the NCF without adding increased burden or bottlenecks in the programming cycle. The scope of the bodies should align with the scope of the objectives. An NCF that supports a comprehensive low-emission, climate-resilient development strategy will require a governance system that is equally compre- hensive. On the other hand, if an NCF supports a more targeted objective with limited stakeholders, then the scope of the gover- nance system could also be limited.
Though not required, many NCFs have a high-level steering committee, chaired by the government, which provides guid- ance and oversight to the fund. The steering committee is usually supported by a technical group that provides a substantive review of proposals to the NCF, and by a secretariat that conducts day-to- day operations. A technical group is made up of substantive experts who evaluate project proposals and provide recommendations to the steering committee. The secretariat schedules meetings, corre- sponds with stakeholders, prepares documentation for meetings Both play an important role in supporting the steering committee
Some governments may have existing bodies, frameworks or systems in place that can serve as portions of the governance structure. A previously established inter-ministerial climate change committee, for example, can take on the role of the steering committee. Or, an existing body within a government ministry may also provide technical expertise or secretariat services. Moreover, when multiple environ- ment or climate change funds exist in a country, the governance structure of one fund can support the operations of others.
Guidelines pertaining to representation on an NCF’s governing bodies should be established during the design phase. Many governments choose to have representatives from the sources and implementers, as well as the trustee, on the steering committee. This can help to ensure that all parts of the fund are coordinated and streamlined. Representation guidelines should also carefully outline the role of non- government stakeholders. Depending on the objectives of the fund, non-government representatives can have decision-making abilities alongside the government, or they may participate as observers.
SUBMISSION AND APPROVAL OF FUNDING PROPOSALSThe process for submitting and approving proposals should be closely linked to the roles of the governing bodies. Identifying who can submit proposals and who approves them will establish the lifecycle of a project proposal. For example, the China CDM Fund is governed by an inter-ministerial board made up of the Ministry of Finance, National Development Reform Commission (NDRC), Ministry of Foreign Affairs, Ministry of Science and Technology, Ministry of Environmental Protection, Ministry of Agriculture and China Meteorological Administration. The collection, management and use of the funds are the responsibility of a Management Centre affiliated with the Ministry of Finance. Projects are submitted to the Management Centre which then sends them to the NDRC for review and recommendations. The recommendations are then sent to the entire board for approval.As demonstrated by this example, the relationships between governing bodies should be clarified to ensure that decision-making is efficient. In many cases, proposals are received by the secretariat, reviewed by a technical group and the technical group's recommendations are forwarded to the steering committee for approval. Each body has a defined role to support the decision-making process. Ultimate oversight and of the fund must also be clarified. For example, in many NCFs, the Steering Committee is responsible for the delivery of the fund. In other NCFs, a government body or other agent may have this role.CRITICAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR INSTILLING EFFECTIVE GOVERNANCE:1. What governing bodies are necessary to ensure efficient operations of the fund?Who reports to whom?2. How will any existing inter-ministerial or other high-level national body relate to the fund?3. Who will be represented in the governing bodies? (e.g., government, private sector, civil society, United Nations, development banks, donors, other development partners)4. What decision-making process will be put in place for the governing bodies?5. Who can submit project proposals? To whom do they submit them?6. What is the project proposal approval process?7. What safeguards will be put in place to increase effectiveness and efficiency?8. What body has ultimate oversight over the activities of the NCF? What individual person will lead this body?9. In the case where there is more than one national environment/climate fund in a country, how do the governing bodies of these funds relate to one another?Sound fiduciary management provides the foundation for the efficient movement and tracking of funds flowing to and from the NCF. As the number of sources in the climate finance landscape continues to expand, an NCF must have a system of fiduciary management that accommodates the multiple standards, project cycles and scale of risks of climate change projects.
DEFINING FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTS
Fiduciary arrangements facilitate relationships between different actors in the NCF structure. An NCF could be potentially coordinating the disbursement of funds to multiple implementers that have different fiduciary standards from the NCF and from each other. It is critical that decision-makers consider how fidu- ciary standards will apply to these various actors. Some NCFs choose to have tailored fiduciary standards for different types of implementers or projects. For example, an NCF may wish to have a different set of fiduciary standards for a multilateral implementer than for an implementer from the private sector. They may also wish to have certain fiduciary standards for a large project that differ from those for a smaller project with lower risk.
Some funds have a "one size fits all" approach where an NCF sets out fiduciary principles that every implementer must apply to their operations. The standards can be as stringent or flexible as necessary. However, NCF designers should take into account that the various types of stakeholders — government entities, private sector, multilateral entities and others — may have varying degrees of flexibility to adopt these standards.
MANAGER OF FIDUCIARY ARRANGEMENTSUsually a trustee or administrative agent manages an NCF's transactions and ensures that funds are collected and distributed in a coordinated and effective manner. To do this, the trustee provides a number of fund management services, including receiving contributions from various sources, disbursing funds to each participating entity on behalf of the steering committee (or other decision-making body), investing funds that are not yet disbursed and providing financial reporting. The trustee does not make decisions on what projects should be funded by the NCF. Rather, it holds the funds in an account and receives instructions from the steering committee for the timing and direction of distribution. Often, the trustee coordinates the legal contracts and agreements that underpin the transactions of funds. It ensures that the NCF meets all legal and fiduciary standards for collecting and distributing funds.A national or international body can serve as the trustee. For some NCFs, the trustee is a national development entity. For instance, the trustee for the Amazon Fund of Brazil is the Brazil National Development Bank (BNDES). BNDES coordinates donations and distributes funds. Other funds, such as Guyana's REDD+ Investment Fund, use the World Bank as their trustee. Still others, such as the Ecuador Yasuni ITT Trust Fund, use the United Nations (UN) system. Importantly, if the body selected as the trustee plays additional roles within the NCF, such as for supporting implementation, the NCF should be designed to ensure that there are no conflicts of interest.Even if the trustee is an external development partner, NCF designers must clarify the relationship between the trustee and government or domestic financial institutions. A national body may wish to engage with the fiduciary management of the NCF in order to support delivery of funds. This can include oversight functions, capacity building or MRV of funds.The trustee may provide a number of other administrative services beyond collecting and distributing funds and legal documentation. This may include gathering and disseminating of data on projects to which funds are distributed. Further, some trustees play a critical role in reporting by consolidating progress reports submitted by implementing entities. These updates are distributed along with financial reports to the steering committee or other body.Almost all trustees require a fee for their services. Fees can range from 1 to 5% of funds managed. Countries should take this into consideration as the agreement with the trustee is established.CAPACITY DEVELOPMENT
Capacity development can be another critical function of fiduciary management. Many countries begin with an international body as the trustee but plan to transition this role to a domestic entity in the future. For this to occur, it is critical that the trustee work closely with national institutions to strengthen domestic fund management so that countries meet international fiduciary standards. This close part- nership will support a smooth transition from one trustee to another, and will maintain a coordinated, predictable funding stream.
CRITICAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR ENSURING SOUND FIDUCIARY MANAGEMENT:
1. How will the trustee be identified? Can a government entity serve as the trustee? Is an external development partner required?
2. Other than acting as a trustee, how will the government or domestic financial institution engage with the financial management of the fund?
3. What services will the trustee provide? (e.g., fund management, legal, reporting)
4. How can conflicts of interest between the trustee and implementers be avoided?
5. What is the relationship between the trustee and the governing/implementing bodies?
6. What fees will the trustee require?
7. If the trustee will transition to another agent in the future, what capacity development activities should be undertaken?
2.6 1 Key Decision 5: Supporting Efficient( Implementation Arrangements
Implementation arrangements — the processes and agents set in place to implement climate change programming — must support the objectives of the NCF and align closely with the other key design decisions.SCOPE OF IMPLEMENTATIONIdentifying what kinds of programmatic instruments — such as grants or loans — will be used to implement the projects establishes the scope of implementation. While many NCFs collect funds and then distribute them as grants, others have diversified their activities to include low-cost loans. For example, the Thailand Energy Efficiency Revolving Fund distributed a pool of government funds to private banks which then provided low-cost loans for energy efficiency. Once the loans were repaid, the money became available for new loans. This continual repayment of the initial loan cycle has supported additional loans.There are many options for identifying the programmatic instru- ments, such as grants and loans, for delivery of NCF funds. Governments should take stock of their legal and financial tools in order to identify what types of services the NCF can provide. The role of national banks should be considered, as the ability for the NCF to capitalize lending institutions will have implications for the financial management of the fund. In order to provide loans, the bank would need to meet international fiduciary standards, and risk and profit sharing arrangements with the NCF would need to be established.
IMPLEMENTERS
Selecting implementers for an NCF should occur in a systematic and transparent way. For many NCFs, project implementers are approved or accredited by the steering committee and can then apply for funding for specific projects. If project applications are approved, the steering committee directs the trustee to release the funds to the implementing entity.
Using the NCF objectives as a guide, a number of organizations or bodies can serve as implementing entities. NCFs can specify that implementation should be carried out by a government ministry or other agent, similar to the manner in which the Adaptation Fund allows accredited entities to directly access funds for implementation. Other options include United Nations agencies, development banks, civil society or the private sector to deliver activities.

Depending on the objectives of the fund, implementation can also occur by using combinations of these actors through, for example, public-private partnerships. Arrangements like this support the objectives of the fund by establishing flexible systems to ensure that implementation is coordinated and efficient.
As with the trustee, implementers require a fee for their services. Fees can range from 5 to 13% of the projects’ costs.
ALIGNING IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS
With all implementers, it is critical that the programmatic cycle is as streamlined as possible to avoid potential “double” project cycles where the NCF would have one project cycle and the implementers another. Projects must be able to move through the system as efficiently as possible in order to avoid unnecessary delays or bottlenecks.Further, given that many NCFs will operate alongside international climate funds such as the Global Environment Facility, Adaptation Fund and Green Climate Fund, or other funds at the national or subnational level, it is important that an NCF's implementing arrangements align with the implementing arrangements of other funds. This will reduce transaction costs and should contribute to knowledge sharing, since some implementers under the NCF may also be implementers under other funds.It is worth noting that, in some funds, the recipient of the fund and the implementer are separate entities. Some NCFs distribute funds to government bodies that sub-contract the implementation work. These systems should be aligned to ensure effective and efficient delivery.CRITICAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR SUPPORTING EFFICIENT IMPLEMENTATION ARRANGEMENTS:1. What kinds of programmatic instruments will be used? (e.g., grants, loans)2. Can the fund capitalize lending institutions to support implementation? What does this mean for financial management and fiduciary standards? What does this mean for risk and profit sharing?3. How will the implementing entities be identified? What criteria are necessary?4. What is the relationship between the fund and the implementers?5. How will the fund engage with the private sector to encourage innovative investment opportunities?6. How can efficient delivery of funds be supported?7. Who has oversight and legal responsibility over implementation?8. How will the implementing arrangements relate to those of other domestic and international funds?9. What fees will implementing entities require?Key Decision 6: Facilitating Effective Monitoring, Reporting and Verification
Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) is a critical component of an NCF. MRV enables the NCF to ensure that results are being delivered, and to collect lessons learned from implementation that will further refine and improve NCF operations.
The NCF should have unambiguous appraisal and performance criteria. Each stakeholder responsible for providing information on the activities of the NCF must have clear guidelines and standards. Public infor- mation systems can often support the dissemination of information.
PROGRAMMATIC AND FINANCIAL REPORTING
Two types of reporting are necessary. First, the activities implemented must be reviewed and data submitted on the results of those activities. Generally, this is conducted in a bottom-up manner by the implementers, which report activities to one of the governing bodies. However, in some NCFs the governing bodies may collect data in a top-down manner by visiting project sites, carrying out evalua- tions or commissioning audits.
In the case of project reporting, MRV should be systematized across the NCF. Guidelines and templates should be established so each implementer reports on a similar set of metrics. This data should be collected by one governing body that can compile the information for further analysis and identification of best practices. Also, institutional arrangements, including the roles of who will be conducting the MRV and who will be compiling the information, should be clarified.
Second, the status of the finances of the NCF must be reported by the trustee. The trustee often provides this information to the secretariat or steering committee on a regular basis. An NCF may choose to monitor the status of its finances through a series of regular reports or using web-based financial tracking tools. This real-time tracking supports transparency and access to information.
ALIGNING MRV SYSTEMS
Similar to the implementing arrangements, MRV systems should align with other domestic and global climate change funds, as well as any MRV requirements of NAMAs, NAPs and other relevant mecha- nisms. This helps the NCF MRV system to be cost-effective, robust and to minimize the reporting burden on NCF implementers.
NCF MRV systems should also be aligned within the fund to ensure that there are clear roles for oversight and audit functions. The body with legal responsibility over implementation and achieving results should be identified and should ensure that the MRV systems optimize the use of existing national systems.
Moreover, some NCFs may wish to use MRV as a way to incentivize results. By aligning MRV with project effectiveness, NCFs can use the information collected as a basis for future funding for the project. For example, in the case of performance-based funds, projects receive initial funding but future support is based on the results achieved. This model can promote accountability and provide incentives for recipients to use funds efficiently.CAPACITY DEVELOPMENTMany MRV systems are new to governments and project implementers that have not been a part of previous MRV systems. Importantly, any MRV mechanisms established should provide tools,                                  methodologies, training and knowledge sharing to help countries strengthen their technical and institutional capacity for developing effective MRV systems.CRITICAL DESIGN CONSIDERATIONS FOR FACILITATING, MONITORING, REPORTING AND VERIFICATION:1. Can the NCF MRV system be built upon any existing systems (e.g., MRV for NAMAs)?2. What type of programmatic or financial information should be reported? How often should information be reported and to whom should the reports be sent?3. How should MRV results be linked to project effectiveness? (e.g., pay-for-performance options)4. Will audits be undertaken? By whom?5. Who will oversee the entire MRV process?6. What types of guidance materials are available or need to be created? What MRV capacity building activities should be undertaken?Consolidating Inputs into Term Sheets
To support efficient, transparent and robust NCF design, UNDP recommends consolidating the design decisions of an NCF into a term sheet organized to capture of the different components featured in this guidebook. A term sheet is a document that outlines critical pieces of information about the design and operations of the fund, including the objectives, capitalization, governance, fiduciary manage- ment, implementation arrangements and MRV. Capturing the objectives and the functional attributes in this way can help to clearly define the scope and administration of the fund so that it effectively supports country objectives. An annotated example term sheet is in Figure 5.
While many NCF term sheets follow a similar structure, the decision points in a term sheet can be tailored to accommodate NCF components that support national needs and priorities. By consolidating design decisions on the components of the fund, the term sheet helps to outline the project cycle and reporting arrangements. It also provides a means to codify agreements regarding fees charged by the trustee and implementing entities, if applicable.
Importantly, term sheets can be used to facilitate engagement with stakeholders during the design process. By outlining each element of the NCF, the document can serve as a structure for discussion and help internal and external stakeholders contribute specific and targeted inputs.
The information captured in the term sheet can also provide a basis for agreement among fund participants. The term sheet can help formalize relationships between NCF sources, governing bodies, implementers and recipients. It can also outline the flow of funds, as well as the decision-making systems that shape the relationships between the fund’s participants (e.g., who reports to whom and how funds are allocated). By codifying this information, the term sheet identifies and clarifies roles, responsibilities and expectations for each part of the NCF.
Through experience, UNDP has learned that term sheets provide a simple, step-by-step tool that can be used as a basis for discussion and agreement throughout the life of the NCF.


Chapter 3: UNDP Trust Fund Advisory and Management ServicesUNDP and National Climate FundsUNDP has broad experience as a trust fund administrator and as an implementation service provider. UNDP administers a large pool of single-country and thematic UNDP Trust Funds, supports an increasing number of UN Multi-Donor Trust Funds and provides implementation services to several key global environment trust funds. Leveraging this experience, UNDP also provides advisory services to countries for the establishment of national environment, climate and biodiversity funds. Chapter 3 of this guidebook presents an overview of on-going UNDP activities as a trust fund administrator, administrative agent for UN Multi-Donor Trust Funds (MDTFs), implementing entity and technical advisor for National Climate Funds.3.1 I UNDP Administered FundsAs the UN development network, present in 176 countries and territories, UNDP administers over 750 Trust Funds. These trust funds include:• Single-country Trust Funds that operate at the national level (e.g., Women and Children's Rights in Ukraine)• Geographic Trust Funds that encompass a region of countries (e.g., Fostering Knowledge Transfer in Disaster Preparedness/Risk Reduction within the Caribbean), a continent (e.g., Integrated Water Management in Africa) or a region at the sub-national level (e.g., Micro-Projects in Northwest Provinces of Cambodia)• Thematic Trust Funds that address an issue globally (e.g., Climate Change, Poverty and Environment, HIV/AIDS)Of the trust funds administered worldwide by UNDP, 58% are single country funds, 25% are geographic trust funds, and 17% are thematic trust funds (Figure 6). UNDP has worked closely with governments, national and sub-national government bodies, inter-ministerial groups and other stakeholders to support the funds to ensure that the funds provide a flexible, coordinated system for delivering results. UNDP's partner network is extensive, working alongside UN agencies, development banks, the private sector and civil society organizations, and draws from a wide breadth of donors by partnering with countries, foundations and the private sector.UNDP supports trust funds as a valuable tool to facilitate south-south cooperation. Lessons learned from one trust fund can be applied to the others; UNDP works to ensure that experiences are exchanged between and among countries. Knowledge sharing and policy dialogues assist in the development and delivery of programming, and are key components of UNDP's work in administering trust funds.3.2 UN Multi-Donor Trust Funds
 UNDP’s portfolio includes over $5 billion in more than 45 country-level and global MDTFs and over 25 Joint Programmes (JPs), administered through a specialized unit UNDP Multi-Partner Trust Fund (MPTF) Office. MDTFs and JPs are important tools to support specific country and/or global level strategic priorities that may be defined in national plans, UN Development Assistance Frameworks (UNDAFs), and “Delivering as One” Frameworks. These funds support country-driven and UN-supported work in more than 80 countries with contributions from over 60 donors and development partners. They support a wide range of objectives, ranging from transition and reconstruction actions to development and environmental issues.
MDTFs and JPs are UN-based funds that respond to the needs on the ground, as defined by the relevant government partners and the UN Country Team. Once a fund is established, it enables the UN system to quickly deploy the technical, operational and administrative capacities of the UN and the expeditious approval and implementation of projects and programmes. MDTFs are established according to the guidance provided in the United Nations Development Group (UNDG) Guidance Note on Establishing, Managing and Closing Multi-Donor Trust Funds and generally relies on UN entities to implement projects and programmes.
The MDTFs are governed through MDTF Steering Committees, which at the country level are normally co-chaired by the Resident Coordinator and national government, and include participating UN organizations and often donors and other stakeholders. One example, the UNDG Iraq Trust Fund, has received over $1.4 billion in contributions from 26 donors, including both developed and developing countries. It has supported 212 projects since 2004 and delivered results through 16 implementers in eight thematic sectors. Another type of fund, the MDG Achievement Fund, includes $700 million that is delivered in more than 50 countries.Though differing in size and structure, each of the funds supports national ownership and capacity building. Further, UNDP supports the UN and other partners by providing fund management services that enhance the coherence, effectiveness and efficiency of the UN system. By providing a transparent and accountable framework for MDTFs, UNDP promotes coordination across UN agencies toward the efficient delivery of results.Importantly, UNDP also has the systems in place to help countries manage trust funds as they evolve and grow. For example, the global UN-REDD Programme Fund helps developing countries to build capacity to reduce emissions from deforestation and forest degradation. The programme started in 2008 with $12 million from a single donor. Only four years later, it had expanded to a $97 million fund funded by four donors. UNDP was able to help the fund navigate this dramatic growth by managing contributions and leveraging initial funds to attract increased investment.For MRV of funds, UNDP provides support through a web-based reporting portal that offers full public disclosure and visibility to all partners. Information relating to donor contributions, transfers and expenditures, approved projects and activities, external reviews and evaluations, official notices and publications are all housed in one accessible location in a full range of information formats. This information documents where, to whom and how much funding has been contributed globally to MDTFs, and tracks the related activities implemented and results achieved. In keeping with UNDP's commitment to transparency, this information is displayed on the MPTF Office GATEWAY in real time directly from UNDP's accounting system (see Figure 7).
UNDP is an implementing agency of some of the largest global environmental trust funds in the world, including the Global Environment Facility Trust Fund, Multilateral Fund, Special Climate Change Fund, Least Developed Countries Fund and Adaptation Fund, The organization currently supports the implementation of an $8 billion portfolio of 1,000 climate change and ecosystems-management projects. As an implementing agency, UNDP provides technical and financial assistance for projects across all thematic areas — including mitigation, adaptation, technology, finance and REDD — and helps countries to put in place the systems that bolster low-emission, climate-resilient develop mentUNDP also provides support for the implementation of projects under a variety of bilateral funds. For example, under the $92 million Africa Adaptation Programme, UNDP supports 20 countries to develop integrated and comprehensive climate change adaptation actions and resilience plans. The programme ensures that national development processes weigh climate change risks and opportunities in order to secure development gains, UNDP helps countries establish an enabling environment and develop the capacity required to design, finance, implement and monitor long-term and cost-effective adaptation policies and plans.
3.4 ( UNDP National Climate Fund Advisory ServicesLeveraging UNDP's experience as a trust fund manager and implementation service provider for global, regional, national and thematic trust funds, UNDP provides advisory services to governments to establish and operate national environment and climate change funds. UNDP's advisory services include support for:• NCF Design• Capitalization• Trustee or Administrative Agent• Capacity Development• ImplementationNCF Design — UNDP supports countries to develop and codify operational guidance to ensure streamlined fund delivery. Using the multi-stakeholder approach of Chapter 2, UNDP helps countries to develop detailed term sheets that consolidate the decisions emerging from the design process. In this way, the funds can provide flexible, coordinated and predictable funding toward the achievement of national sustainable development priorities.Designing funds according to a country's priorities and circumstances is central to UNDP's approach. The objectives of a fund, for example, should align with national goals on climate change, any short-, medium- and long-term climate and development plans, capacities to manage and deliver climate finance and other political and economic considerations. In cases where countries do not have an existing strategy on climate change, or the existing strategy is outdated, UNDP has the tools and guidelines to help countries develop comprehensive strategic and programmatic roadmaps to achieve sustainable low-emission, climate-resilient development.Ensuring that all relevant stakeholders participate in the design process is an important element of any national fund. UNDP's term sheet approach consolidates stakeholder inputs so that a national fund addresses country-driven priorities as efficiently and effectively as possible. While the questions posed in a term sheet are universal — objectives, capitalization, governance, fiduciary arrangements, implementing arrangements and MRV — UNDP works to ensure that the answers reflect unique country priorities and circumstances.UNDP has established teams of technical advisers at the national, regional and global level, as well as administrative and trustee units, to support countries throughout project design and delivery. For more detail on UNDP's support team, please see www.undp.org/climatechange.
Capitalization — Mobilizing resources is a critical part of any national fund. UNDP assists countries with establishing regulatory frameworks for identifying and collecting resources. This includes public, private, multilateral and bilateral sources of finance.From UNDP's experience, it is imperative that climate finance be used catalytically, leveraging accessible funding sources to spur additional investments in climate change projects. The finance required to support action on climate change is immense and an NCF should be able to collect and blend multiple sources together for maximum benefit. For example, an NCF can use public funds to create enabling investment environments and remove barriers for domestic and foreign investment. In this way, public funds cannot only be leveraged to attract private investment in projects, but the NCF lays the foundation for private investment in the longer term.UNDP has a number of facilities, tools and platforms to help countries put capitalization systems in place to attract and manage new sources of finance. One programme, the MDG Carbon Facility, works together with commercial banks to provide the private sector in developing countries with a direct link to carbon markets. Another programme, Capacity Development for Decision-Makers to Address Climate Change, helps countries to conduct investment and financial flow analyses so they can get an accurate picture of what types of finance are needed to accomplish their climate change goals.UNDP also assists countries as they consider using innovative sources of finance. Establishing a levy on specific industries, for example, can require a number of regulatory and financial frameworks. UNDP helps countries to explore these options.Trustee or Administrative Agent — As a trustee/administrative agent, UNDP provides transparent and accountable fund management services to enhance coherence, effectiveness and efficiency. UNDP provides the full range of financial services, including receiving contributions from sources, administering funds received, disbursing funds to each implementing organization in accordance with the objectives and guidance of the fund, consolidating statements and reports and providing final reporting.UNDP provides a "one stop shop" for all of the financial and legal activities of the NCF. Legal documents, such as partnership agree-ments, memorandums of understanding and other agreements that codify partnerships and relationships with stakeholders, can be held by UNDP. Furthermore, contributors, governing bodies, implementers and recipients can find information on the collection, management and disbursement of funds from one unified source. This supports transparency, efficiency and accountability.
UNDP, when acting as the administrative agent/trustee, only disburses funds when directed by the governing bodies. The administrative agent/trustee does not make any funding or implementation decisions at anytime.Capacity Development — As a capacity building organization, UNDP works to ensure that any national fund strengthens the capacity of governing bodies, implementers, recipients and other stakeholders, enhancing their ability to manage the operations of the fund and to support delivery of projects. This promotes a country's ownership and ensures that the operations of the fund fully align with national priorities.This is especially important as countries engage with national implementation and "direct access" of climate finance. UNDP's services for NCFs strengthen national institutions' ability to collect, blend, coordinate and account for climate finance, helping them align with international fiduciary standards. Through NCFs, countries can build the national systems that better position them to manage climate change programming and meet the standards necessary for national implementation under the Adaptation Fund and other sources.Implementation — As discussed above, UNDP also provides implementation services at the national, regional and global levels, and can support the implementation of NCF programmes in different capacities. Importantly, UNDP has systems in place to manage its role as an administrative agent/trustee alongside its role as an implementer of climate change projects. To avoid any real or perceived conflict of interest between its fund-management and programmatic roles, UNDP firewalls its administrative and implementing functions. This helps to keep the government in the driving seat and establish clear roles to support the efficient delivery of funds to achieve results on the ground.
ConclusionCountries have immense opportunities to utilize climate finance — more sources of funding exist than ever before to help countries achieve their climate change objectives. However, in order for this increased funding to achieve real results, countries must be equipped to effectively access and channel funds toward their climate and development priorities. It is critical that the increased number of funding sources are matched with an increase in a country's ability to collect, blend, coordinate and account for climate finance.As this guidebook demonstrates, National Climate Funds are a useful tool that can support countries to optimize their access to and management of climate finance. NCFs are nationally-owned and nationally- managed so that a country can collect the sources that are right for them, blend them together, impie ment activities in a manner that accomplishes their priorities and set up a nationally-relevant system to account for the results of their work. NCFs put countries in the driving seat for transforming their economies and achieving low-emission, climate-resilient development.Based on UNDP's experience in the administration of over 750 trust funds at the national, global and regional levels, and 40 Multi-Donor Trust Funds around the world, there is a set of key decisions that a country must consider when designing and establishing an NCF:• Defining the objectives• Identifying capitalization• Instilling effective governance• Ensuring sound fiduciary management• Supporting efficient implementation arrangements• Facilitating effective monitoring, reporting and verificationOnce key decisions have been made, a country will have crafted the components of its NCF; these components will provide a structure that helps to drive resources toward a country's climate and development priorities. A carefully considered and well-designed NCF will ensure that systems are in place to facilitate the flow of funds and monitoring, reporting and verification. Further, support and coordination should underscore all of an NCF's components, ensuring that efficient decision-making supports the implementation of projects and programmes that achieve the NCF's goals.Importantly, NCFs are not one-size-fits-all. Each NCF must be tailored to country priorities and realities. They should be firmly rooted in, and aligned with, existing national strategies, frameworks, systems and other initiatives on climate change. NCFs must also define the fund's relationship to other global funds and programmes so that the NCF can make the best use of available resources and avoid duplicating other efforts.

In UNDP's experience, the use of a term sheet helps to define the design and operations of the NCF by capturing the key considerations of each of its components. As a document that outlines critical pieces of information about the operations and scope of the fund, a term sheet supports an efficient, transparent and robust NCF design. While the questions posed by a term sheet are universal, the answers will be unique to each country.Stakeholder engagement is a critical part of the design and establishment of NCFs. Government, civil society, academia, the United Nations, development banks, the private sector and others can contribute specific and targeted inputs so that the NCF operates as efficiently as possible. Term sheets are also useful for this purpose — they can provide a structure for stakeholder engagement, ensuring that all voices are heard, and that roles, responsibilities and expectations are defined clearly.Capacity development is also a key element of any NCF. The NCF should support on-going capacity development of governing bodies, implementers, the trustee and other stakeholders so that they can drive results and continue to build robust systems that address the country's climate change priorities over time. Capacity development is especially important as more global funds include opportunities for countries to access funds directly. Countries can use NCFs to strengthen national institutions and align with international fiduciary standards so that they can meet the criteria associated with those funds.Throughout this guidebook, a number of existing NCFs have been featured. It is important to learn from their experiences and build on lessons from their NCF design and establishment process. A key lesson applicable to all countries designing an NCF is to be very clear about what the NCF should accomplish. Countries must realistically assess their needs: in some cases the NCF should be very broad and attract many different types of funding sources; in others, a more targeted NCF is necessary to focus on a key priority for the country. The targeted NCF can be capitalized by a limited number of funding sources in order to decrease administrative and operating costs.NCFs help countries to manage climate finance and to achieve their sustainable development goals. By creating an NCF, a country sets in place a system that efficiently collects, blends, coordinates and accounts for climate finance, helping it to take advantage of the increased number of climate funding sources available. In this way, NCFs help countries to manage climate finance catalytically and build a system that supports low-emission and climate-resilient development now and in the future.


Glossary of Terms

Adaptation - Initiatives and measures to reduce the vulnerability of natural and human systems to actual or expected climate change effects.Adaptation Fund - The Adaptation Fund was established by the Parties to the Kyoto Protocol of the UNFCCC to finance concrete adaptation projects and programmes in developing countries that are Parties to the Kyoto Protocol. The Fund is financed with 2% of the Certified Emission Reduction issued for projects of the Clean Development Mechanism and other sources of funding.Additionality - Reduction in emissions by sources or enhancement of removals by sinks that is additional to any that would occur in the absence of a Joint Implementation (Jl) or a Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) project activity as defined in the Kyoto Protocol Articles on Jl and CDM.Capitalization - Refers to the types of resources that the fund would collect. International, national, public and private funds can all be relevant for an NCF.Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) - Defined in Article 12 of the Kyoto Protocol, the CDM is intended to meet two objectives: (1) to assist parties not included in Annex I in achieving sustainable development and in contributing to the ultimate objective of the convention; and (2) to assist parties included in Annex I in achieving compliance with their quantified emission limitation and reduction commitments.Climate change - Any change in climate over time, whether due to natural variability or because of human activity.Climate variability - Variations in the mean state and other statistics (such as standard deviations, the occurrence of extremes, etc.) of the climate of all temporal and spatial scales beyond that of individual weather events. Variability may result from natural internal processes within the climate system (internal variability) or from variations in natural or anthropogenic external processes (external variability).Conference of the Parties (COP) - The supreme body of the UNFCCC, comprised of countries with the right to vote that have ratified or acceded to the convention.Direct access - A funding modality in which domestic entities can access funds to implement climate change programmes and projects. Financial transfers are made directly from the funding source to the domestic entity for implementation.Ecosystem -A system of living organisms interacting with each other and their physical environment.Emissions trading - A market-based approach to achieving emissions reduction objectives. It allows those reducing GFIG emissions below their emission cap to use or trade the excess reductions to offset emissions at another source inside or outside the country.
Fiduciary management - Fiduciary management allows for the efficient movement and tracking of funds flowing to and from an NCF. This can include establishing fiduciary standards that apply to all monetary transactions. Fossil fuels - Carbon-based fuels from fossil hydrocarbon deposits, including coal, peat, oil and natural gas. Global Environment Facility (GEF) - Established in 1991, the GEF is a financial mechanism under the UNFCCC that provides grants to countries for projects related to biodiversity, climate change, international waters, land degradation, the ozone layer and persistent organic pollutants. Green Climate Fund (GCF) - Established at COP 16 in Cancun, Mexico, the GCF joined the GEF as a financial mechanism under the UNFCCC. The GCF will support climate change projects, programmes and policies and other activities in developing countries using thematic funding windows. The exact design arrangements and structure of the GCF will be negotiated through a Transitional Committee with the goal of approving the modalities at COP 17 in 2011. Greenhouse gases - Greenhouse gases are those gaseous constituents of the atmosphere, both natural and anthropogenic, that absorb and emit radiation at specific wavelengths within the spectrum of infrared radiation emitted by the Earth's surface, the atmosphere and clouds. This property causes the greenhouse effect. Water vapor (H20), carbon dioxide (C02), nitrous oxide (N20), methane (CH4) and ozone (03) are the primary greenhouse gases in the Earth's atmosphere. Moreover, there are a number of entirely human-made greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, such as the halocarbons and other chlorine- and bromine- containing substances. These are dealt with under the Montreal Protocol. Besides carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide and methane, the Kyoto Protocol deals with the greenhouse gases sulfur hexafluoride, hydro fluorocarbons and per fluorocarbons. Governance of an NCF - Governance includes bodies, decision-making processes and oversight functions that facilitate efficient management of an NCF. Implementation - Implementation includes the processes and agents set in place to carry out NCF programmes and projects. This can include programmatic instruments (e.g., grants or loans), processes for selecting implementing entities and oversight and legal responsibilities. Innovative sources of climate finance - Innovative sources refers to a range of non-traditional mechanisms to raise new and additional funds for development and climate activities, such as taxes on transport or financial transaction. The term is also sometime used to define innovative public financial schemes such as public-private equity funds or government-sponsored loan guarantee funds to scale up development action.
Chapter 6: Annex

 Kyoto Protocol - The Kyoto Protocol to the UNFCCC was adopted at the Third Session of the Conference of the Parties (COP) in 1997 in Kyoto. It contains legally binding commitments, in addition to those included in the UNFCCC. Annex B countries agreed to reduce their anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions (carbon dioxide, methane, nitrous oxide, hydrofluorocarbons, perfluorocarbons and sulphur hexafluoride) by at least 5% below 1990 levels in the commitment period 2008 to 2012.The Kyoto Protocol came into force on 16 February 2005. Market barriers - In the context of climate change mitigation, market barriers are conditions that prevent or impede the diffusion of cost- effective technologies or practices that would mitigate greenhouse gas emissions. Mitigation - Technological change and substitution that reduces resource inputs and emissions per unit of output. Monitoring, Reporting and Verification (MRV) - MRV refers to the ability to quantify the results of an activity or funding commitment and provide this information to others. The information can then be independently checked for accuracy and reliability. Montreal Protocol - The Montreal Protocol on Substances that Deplete the Ozone Layer was adopted in Montreal in 1987, and subsequently adjusted and amended in London (1990), Copenhagen (1992), Vienna (1995), Montreal (1997) and Beijing (1999). It controls the consumption and production of chlorine-and bromine-containing chemicals that destroy stratospheric ozone, such as chlorofluorocarbons, methyl chloroform, carbon tetrachloride and many others. Multi-Donor Trust Funds (MDTFs) - MDTFs are a type of NCF that is generally established to support specific country and/or global level strategic priorities that may be defined in national plans, UN Development Assistance Frameworks (UNDAFs), "Delivering as One" Frameworks, etc. Generally, an MDTF relies on UN agencies for implementation services. Nationally-Appropriate Mitigation Action (NAMA) - Established under the UNFCCC process, a NAMA refers to a set of policies and actions countries undertake as part of a commitment to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. National Adaptation Programme of Action (NAPA) - Under the UNFCCC process, NAPAs provide a process for Least Developed Countries to identify priority activities based on urgent and immediate needs to adapt to climate change. LDCs submit NAPAs to the UNFCCC and can receive funding to implement the priority activities identified. National Adaptation Plan (NAP) - While NAPA focus on urgent and immediate needs, a NAP targets medium and long-term adaptation needs. NAPs can be undertaken by all countries.
National Climate Fund (NCF) - An NCF is a mechanism that supports countries to direct finance toward climate change projects and programmes by facilitating the collection, blending, coordination of, and accounting for climate finance. NCFs provide a country-driven system that can support climate change goal setting and strategic programming, oversee climate change project approval and implementation, measure performance, offer policy assurance and financial control of climate change funds, and assist with partnership management.National Implementing Entity (NIE) - Under the Adaptation Fund,NIEs are the national legal entities that have been identified by the Adaptation Fund Board as meeting the fiduciary standards adopted by the Board and accredited as NIE. NIEs can access funds directly for implanting climate change projects.Objectives of an NCF - Objectives are the strategic goals of an NCF.This can include mitigation, adaptation, REDD, capacity building, technology or other programmatic priorities, as well as management priorities such as attracting private sector investment.Private equity - Investors focus on later stage and more mature technology or projects, and generally expects to exit their investment and make their returns in a three to five-year timeframe.Public-Private Partnership (PPP) - A government service or private business venture which is funded and operated through a partnership of government and one or more private sector companies. PPP involves a contract between a public sector authority and a private party, in which the private party provides a public service or project and assumes substantial financial, technical and operational risk in the project.Resilience - Refers to three conditions that enable a social or ecological system to absorb change and not fundamentally fall apart. The conditions are: ability to self-organize, ability to buffer disturbance and capacity for learning and adapting.Secretariat - A secretariat manages day-to-day operations of the NCF, including scheduling meetings, collecting documents and liaising with the Steering Committee, Technical Committee, Implementers and other agents.Stakeholders - Those who have interests in a particular decision, either as individuals or as representatives of a group. This includes people who can influence a decision as well as those affected by it. Decision makers are also stakeholders.Standards - Set of rules or codes mandating or defining product performance (e.g., grades, dimensions, characteristics, test methods and rules for use).Steering Committee - A Steering Committee of an NCF makes decisions on the disbursal of funds and oversees the high-level activities, including policy and operational guidelines, strategic direction and reporting. This group is often made up of multiple government ministries, such as environment, planning and finance, and representatives from civil society, the United Nations, development banks, private sector or other partners.
Subsidy - Direct payment or a tax reduction issued by the government to a private party for implementing a practice the government wishes to encourage.Sources of climate finance - A number of sources can contribute to an NCF, including public domestic finance, public multilateral finance, public bilateral finance, private sources and innovative sources.Technical Committee - The Technical Committee supports the Steering Committee by providing substantive reviews of project proposals and making recommendations for which proposals should receive funding.Term sheet - A term sheet is a non-binding financial agreement that describes each of the elements of an NCF. It provides a concise framework for the objectives, capitalization, governance, fiduciary management, implementation arrangements and MRV of an NCF so that the basic conditions under which the NCF will operate are clearly defined. While many NCF term sheets follow a similar structure, they can be tailored to accommodate NCF design elements that support national needs and priorities.Trustee/Administrative Agent - the trustee of an NCF provides a number of important fund management services, including receiving and holding contributions from various sources, disbursing funds to each participating entity on behalf of the steering committee (or other decision-making body) and providing financial reporting. Often, the trustee coordinates the legal contracts and agreements that underpin the transactions of funds. It ensures that the NCF meets all legal and fiduciary standards for collecting and distributing funds.United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC; Convention) - The Convention was adopted on 9 May 1992 in New York and signed at the 1992 Earth Summit in Rio de Janeiro by more than 150 countries and the European Economic Community. Its ultimate objective is the 'stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in the atmosphere at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference with the climate system/ It contains commitments for all parties. Under the Convention, parties included in Annex I aimed to return greenhouse gas emission not controlled by the Montreal Protocol to 1990 levels by the year 2000.Vulnerability - The degree to which an individual, group or system is susceptible to harm due to hazards or stress, and its (in)ability to cope, recover or fundamentally adapt (become a new system or become extinct).
