

Financial Times
News, Saturday, February 20, 2021 429 mots, p. 3

UK summit 'last, best hope' of hitting climate goal, says
Kerry
Munich Security Conference

LESLIE HOOK

US climate tsar John Kerry warned that the upcoming UN climate summit in Glasgow was "our last, best
hope" to get the world on track to limit global warming to 1.5C, as he underscored the security challenges
posed by climate change.

"Climate change is a threat multiplier," he said, in his ﬁrst speech on the international stage since taking up
his role as President Joe Biden's special envoy for climate. "When tensions are already high somewhere ... the
embers of conﬂict just burn brighter.

"Climate change is among the most complex security issues we have ever faced," he told Nato leaders at the
Munich Security Conference.

Kerry   said   the   world   had   just   nine   years   to   put   in   place   the   policies   that   would   help   avert   the   worst
consequences of global warming. "There is no faking it in this moment," he added.

The   US   formally   re-entered   the   Paris   climate   accord   yesterday,   30   days   after   Biden   asked   to   rejoin   by
executive ﬁat on the day of his inauguration. "I'm sending a clear message to the world: American is back," he
told Nato leaders yesterday after a wide-ranging discussion between G7 leaders.

"This is a global existential crisis, and we will all suffer the consequences if we fail," Biden said. "We have to
rapidly accelerate our efforts to curb emissions, and hold one another accountable for meeting our goals,
and increasing our ambitions."

The US return to the Paris accord, just over 100 days after its exit last November, means the US will need to
announce a new emissions target ahead of the COP26 climate summit in Glasgow in November. The existing
US target, set by the Obama administration, is to cut emissions by at least 26 per cent by 2025, relative to
2005 levels.

The COP26 summit, hosted by the UK, may help to solidify a common tie on climate change between the US
and the UK.

Boris Johnson, prime minister, said he was "delighted" that the US had rejoined the Paris climate agreement
and praised Biden's leadership.

"The UK's aim will be to rally as many countries as possible behind the target of net zero emissions by 2050,"
said Johnson.

The Paris climate accord aims to limit global warming to well below 2C, ideally to 1.5C, and has been ratiﬁed
by 190 countries. The US is the only signatory to have ever withdrawn.

The US, which is the world's second-largest emitter after China, pulled out of the Paris accord last November
under then president Donald Trump.





 


