 Sunday, January 5, 2020 - 17:47Z 324 mots

Geography class: Glasgow climate talks on hold over coronavirus

Topic : OCR A Level Geography Scheme of Work: Topic 3.1: Climate Change

Overview Areas covered:

3. Why is there a debate over Climate Change?

4. In what ways can humans respond to Climate Change?

5. Can an international response to Climate Change ever work?

Click to read the article below and then answer the questions:

Glasgow climate talks on hold over coronavirus

Suggest why COP26 2020 was to be such an important event and explain the implications of its hoped for outcome.

Give one positive and one negative consequence of the postponement.

The article has had several responses. Read the letter from Connor McCoole in response to the postponement:

Summarise the key points in his letter.

Read the comments from readers after the news reporting, from C3PM, Richard, and John 9913. C3PM wrote: 'We don't know yet if policymakers are overreacting to Climate Change. Imagine if trillions of dollars was spent thoughtfully to reduce carbon emissions 20 years ago'.

Richard replied: 'People need jobs first before they start worrying about Climate Change'. John 9913 replied: 'Dead people don't need jobs. There is a hierarchy of needs, a viable environment is a precondition for a functioning economy'.

What are the common arguments expressed by the two readers C3PM andJohn 9913?

Read the Financial Times opinion article: Coronavirus has exposed our arrogant relationship with nature

The writer's opinion is that 'the threats we face are interrelated'. Suggest a minimum of three problems the writer highlights about world approaches to the interrelated problems of nature and climate.

He claims that the world already has the technology to tackle climate change, but lacks the will to act collectively. Research Mitigation and Adaptation strategies to reduce the risks of Climate Change.

Assess how effective responses to Climate Change have been at differing levels of political and social co-operation and differing geographic scales (global, national, local). 