

Financial Times
News, Saturday, February 27, 2021 522 mots, p. 4

UN rebukes 75 nations over climate failures
Global warmingReport says countries are falling 'far short' of goals to cut greenhouse gases

CAMILLA HODGSON

Climate plans laid out by 75 countries responsible for a third of global emissions "fall far short" of what is
needed to meet the goals of the Paris accord on global warming, a ﬁnding that must serve as a "wake-up
call" for all governments, the UN said.

In a stark warning delivered ahead of an international climate summit in November, Patricia Espinosa, the
UN climate change executive secretary, said the combined efforts were woefully inadequate and appealed to
the world's biggest emitters to "step up" with ambitious greenhouse gas reduction plans this year.

The updated plans from countries including the UK and Australia and the EU submitted by December
demonstrated that "current levels of climate ambition are very far from putting us on a pathway that will
meet our Paris Agreement goals", she said.

Signatories   of   the   Paris   Agreement   pledged   to   limit   warming   to   "well   below"   2C,   compared   with   pre-
industrial   levels,   by   2100.   They   were   asked   to   submit   ambitious   emissions   reductions   plans,   known   as
Nationally Determined Contributions, by the end of 2020.

The 75 countries that met this deadline account for about 30 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions. If
those nations' new targets were implemented, the UN said in its latest report card, their combined emissions
would fall just 0.5 per cent by 2030, compared with 2010 levels. That is drastically lower than the 45 per cent
fall in global emissions needed to limit warming to 1.5C, or "far short of what is required", the UN said.

All countries, including those that had already submitted new plans, had to urgently "look at how they can
increase their ambition", said Espinosa.

Just one of the world's four largest greenhouse gas emitters had submitted its plan in time to be included in
the analysis — the EU group of 27 countries. New commitments have yet to be put forward by China, the
largest global emitter, the US and India.

Niklas Höhne, partner at NewClimate Institute, a non-proﬁt group that tracks action on climate change, said
more ambitious targets were expected from those three nations. "We have a huge gap, we are totally off
target. But I'm hopeful that we see more movement in the course of this year."

US president Joe Biden has made action on climate a priority and moved to rejoin the Paris Agreement on
his ﬁrst day in ofﬁce after former president Donald Trump left the accord. China has pledged to be carbon
neutral by 2060.

Höhne said the UN analysis should draw attention to those countries that had not raised their targets and
simply resubmitted their original plans.

Japan, South Korea, Russia, New Zealand, Switzerland and Australia all delivered plans that failed to improve
on their 2015 target. Brazil's climate plan lacked any goals to cut emissions by 2030.

Without naming speciﬁc nations, Espinosa rebuked those countries: "It's incredible to think that just when
nations are facing an emergency that could eventually end human life on this planet ... many nations are
sticking to their business-as-usual approach."



 


