 News, Monday, April 20, 2020 334 mots, p. 2

FT Fm

Keep on climate path, urge investors
ATTRACTA MOONEY

Big investors h ave urged companies to maintain their focus on reducing carbon emissions, even as businesses grapple with the economic fallout of coronavirus.

Eight investment groups, including BNP Paribas Asset Management, DWS and Comgest Asset Management, told FTfm that tackling global warming must continue to be a priority for public companies, despite unprecedented pressure on businesses globally after government measures to tackle the pandemic left whole sectors unable to operate.

The investors said businesses would be given leeway when it came to climate change this year, but warned against backtracking on targets to reduce carbon emissions.

"We will be quite vigilant that companies do not use this to cancel or postpone some commitments they have already made," said Sébastien Thevoux-Chabuel, a portfolio manager at Comgest, the French asset manager.

"What is happening now is what we could see with climate change ... with a lot of supply and demand falling."

Michael Herskovich, head of corporate governance at BNP Paribas Asset Management, said the €440bn fund house continued to discuss climate change with the businesses it invests in.

Over the past couple of years, big investors have pushed companies to tackle their carbon emissions, teaming up together through initiatives such as Climate Action 100+, amid growing concerns of an economic fallout from global warming. Partly in response to investor and customer pressure, businesses have begun making so-called net-zero commitments — pledging to cut or offset emissions by taking an equivalent amount out of the atmosphere through carbon capture and other technologies.

Companies including oil major BP, British bank Barclays, food company Nestlé, miner Vale and airline group IAG have all set net-zero targets, usually for 2050. On Thursday, Royal Dutch Shell became the biggest global energy group to announce a net-zero emissions target. 