Financial Times (website)6 novembre 2020 
ESG data explosion, investors demand diversity, policymakers fight climate change ... to ask for more sustainability data 
Will company boards lose focus on advancing racial equality? Germany's central bank chief Jens Weidmann speaks out about climate change. Is Jay Powell listening? Data explosion, investors demand diversity, policymakers fight climate changeBilly Nauman, Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson and Patrick Temple-West Welcome to Moral Money. If you have not already, check out the FT's new climate hub page . And remember you can keep track of Moral Money in between newsletters at our hub page here . This week we have:It's not all about carbon: CDP to ask for more sustainability dataWill company boards lose focus on advancing racial equality?Germany's central bank chief Jens Weidmann speaks out about climate change. Is Jay Powell listening?ESG data explosion shows surging importance of 'non-financial' dataCDP, the non-profit formerly known as the Carbon Disclosure Project, has seen a big jump this year in the number of companies disclosing sustainability data, which is a strong indicator of investors' growing interest in "non-financial" environmental, social and governance information.The group received data from more than 9,600 companies, which is 14 per cent more than last year and 70 per cent more than five years ago. Considering everything else going on in 2020, that is quite striking.It also highlights another crucial point that investors should remember as they ponder the implications of the US election: whatever does (or does not) emanate next from Washington in terms of American federal policy on the environment, the momentum in the private sector to embrace environmental issues is swelling almost in spite of government.Moreover, the nature of "E" is shifting. Next up for CDP is to expand its survey beyond its current questions on carbon emissions, deforestation and water security to include a "full range" of environmental factors, said chief executive Paul Simpson . Soon it will begin asking for data to track companies' impact on nature or biodiversity - which is the next frontier for sustainable investors.CDP is playing a critical role in steering the future of ESG disclosure, working with a group of peers such as the Sustainability Accounting Standards Board and the Global Reporting Initiative to set out a harmonized reporting framework - which may well be adopted by regulators in Europe.But even without mandatory disclosure, its work is having an impact. Although the US is miles behind Europe on ESG, 75 per cent of the S&P 500 sent data to CDP, said Mr Simpson. Given the country's uncertain political future at the moment, this is a welcome reminder that ESG investors can play an important role in pushing for climate action, no matter what ends up happening in Washington."We know that CDP disclosure really works," Mr Simpson said. "Companies, when they're first disclosing, only 38 per cent of them have an emissions reduction target. By their third year of disclosure that's up to 69 per cent. So that process of measuring and disclosing actually is [effective]."He added: "The markets are driving this, and that data is really coming now in unprecedented amounts . . . We think we need to see mandatory disclosure evolve around the world as quickly as possible. But it is important to note that market levers can actually drive change. Sometimes a lot faster than the regulation." ( Billy Nauman )Investors to companies: expect no let-up on diversity pledgesAfter all their pledges in response to this summer's protests, will company boards lose focus on advancing racial equality as other challenges compete for directors' time and resources?That has been the concern, but a new survey from the Conference Board suggests that US investors are not about to let companies off the hook on this issue.The US business research organisation spoke to shareholders representing more than $12tn in assets under management and found that race was the socio-economic issue they were most focused on."There's a clear consensus that something more is required from companies," particularly around disclosure, Paul Washington , executive director of theConference Board's ESG centre, Moral Money.toldThat is likely to result in actions that go beyond votes on shareholder proposals, affecting director elections and - in the case of active funds - capital allocation, he said. Nominating committee members of boards that fall short could be particularly vulnerable, he added, maybe not immediately but certainly by next year.The Conference Board advises companies to err on the side of transparency. As its report puts it: "If companies don't identify their own shortcomings, someone else will." (Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson)impactWanted: student social investment projects : We are looking for innovative student-led ESG/social investment activities in business schools. Submit your examples here by November 15. The best will be cited in the FT and can attend our Investing for Good US summit.Lagarde and Bailey, now Weidmann European central bankers are rallying behind the idea that monetary policy can tilt against global warming - and their statements might be resonating across the pond too.This year, Andrew Bailey , governor of the Bank of England, and François Villeroy de Galhau , governor of the Banque de France, wrote that central banks "must use our financial stability mandates and expertise to ensure climate risks are effectively managed in the financial system".ditching its market neutrality principle for buying corporate bonds and scrutinise assets for climate risk.Also in October, climate activist groups published a letter they received from Germany's central bank chief Jens Weidmann (pictured above with Ms Lagarde) in which he addressed climate action for central banks head-on."Central banks can do more to cope with climate change than they have done so far," he wrote in a letter to climate activist groups including Urgewald, a German non-profit environmental and human rights organisation. Climate policy is primarily a matter for elected governments, he said. But Europe's central banks should ensure that financial risks from climate change are made transparent, Mr Weidmann said. The Euro-system should consider requiring that securities purchased or accepted as collateral meet certain climate-related reporting obligations, he added."Climate-related risks could be a possible criterion when deciding which securities to buy or which securities to use as collateral for monetary policy refinancing operations," Mr Weidmann said.His comments were applauded, but came with reservations. "Just more reporting and transparency on climate risks are nothing more than a first step, if, for example, fossil fuel companies' shares and bonds in banks portfolios are still accepted as security without restriction," Regine Richter , a campaigner at German environmental lobby group Urgewald, told Moral Money.Last month, Christine Lagarde said the European Central Bank would considerThe European ideas are being heard in Washington with perhaps increasing interest as Joe Biden looks likely to win the presidency. The Federal Reserve is expected to protect the public from material risks, and "climate change is one of those risks", chair Jay Powell said on Thursday. The Fed is working with central bank colleagues on climate change risks, he added. "We are watching what other countries are doing."(Patrick Temple-West)Has 2020 truly been a game-changer for impact investing? Please join Billy Nauman and the FT for a webinar on November 18: Impact Investing in 2020. This event will discuss and seek to answer questions about impact investment this year and beyond.Chart of the dayThe growth of ESG investing has become a dominant theme of 2020 (some might say it is a bubble). And investors need look no further for evidence of this phenomenon than the books of one company: MSCI, the New York-based index provider.MSCI makes money on ESG data with index subscriptions and licensing fees for ESG exchange traded funds. More than 11 per cent of MSCI's revenue comes from BlackRock, which is launching 27 new ESG ETFs this year alone.In the third quarter of 2020, MSCI ESG indices were linked to $71bn of assets, up from $25bn a year ago, according to Morningstar. Organic subscription growth for MSCI's ESG and climate products surged 46 per cent, up from 41 per cent and 36 per cent in the first quarter and second quarters of 2020.ber 4 investor presentation, MSCI said under 20 per cent of the signatories to the UN PRI were ESG research clients.property owners (FT)Consumer goods makers trail on plastic recycling (FT)Smart readsCalifornia voters' decision to let Uber and other gig economy companies continue to treat their workers as independent contractors has dealt a crushing blow to campaigners and legislators and paved the way for the companies to remake labour laws across the US, writes the FT's Dave Lee. The FT's editorial board said the vote, while a victory that sent Uber and Lyft share prices soaring, "is a loss not only for workers but also for good policymaking. The risk is that it starts to shape laws elsewhere in the US."Japan's ethical capitalism has lessons for the world on ESG, writes Jim McCafferty, head of Asia Pacific equity research at Nomura. "For westerners focused on ESG investing, Japan provides a model for shareholders who coexist with other stakeholders," he said.Further readingUS formally withdraws from Paris climate agreement (FT)Exclusive: European Development Finance group to exit fossil fuel investments by 2030 (Reuters)New ESG Hedge Fund Tops Activist List in Third Quarter (Bloomberg)California Bars Insurers From Dropping Policies in Wildfire Areas (New York Times)San Francisco voters approve taxes on CEOs, big businesses (AP).