

Financial Times (web site)
Saturday, February 27, 2021 - Z 582 mots

Architects take on climate change in For Those That Wish
to Exist

Ludovic Hunter-Tilney

In an ironic reversal of the moral panic it inspired in the 1970s and 1980s, heavy metal has become a bastion
of morality. The battle between good and evil is its core topic. Even the bands espousing evil, of whom there
are admittedly a fair few, implicitly acknowledge the existence of goodness. The genre is policed by ethical
notions of integrity and not selling out. There is a strong attitude of kinship among fans. A code of duty and
honour prevails.

Architects' new album For Those That Wish to Exist applies the titanic struggle between good and bad to the
issue   of   climate change.   "Are   you   fanning   the   ﬂames?"   singer   Sam   Carter   demands   in   "An   Ordinary
Extinction" amid ﬂayed drums and scorched-earth riffs. The question invites self-interrogation while the
music has an excoriating intensity. It wants to get at the truth.

The musical style belongs to a sub-genre called "metalcore", which emerged in the 1990s from US hardcore
punk and extreme metal. It has its own moral traditions. Architects, from Brighton in the UK, are drawn to
the "straight edge" philosophy that US hardcore bands such as Minor Threat advocated in the 1980s, based
around   abstinence   from   meat   and   intoxicants.   Their   environmentalism   chimes   with   that   of   pioneering
metalcore band Earth Crisis, whose 1995 album Destroy the Machines delivered a bludgeoning message of
ecological and animal rights activism.

For Those That Wish to Exist is the ninth Architects album. During the course of their career, they have risen
to become one of the biggest bands in metalcore. Their new record tackles its subject matter with discipline
and seriousness. The music is loud but not chaotic. It is played with control, a carefully arranged assembly of
interlaced guitar parts and drumming, topped by vocals that vary between harsh screaming and tuneful
singing. Intelligibility is prized over brute force. Melodic choruses open up emotional spaces in songs.

Themes of death and grief in the current age of species loss are fused with feelings of personal bereavement.
Former guitarist Tom Searle, who founded the band with his drumming twin brother Dan Searle, died in
2016. "It's all in parallel," Carter sings on opening track "Do You Dream of Armageddon?" as electronics skitter
around him and a big blockbuster of a drumbeat hammers away. String arrangements add an imposing
extra dimension. It signals that a grand endeavour is under way.

The album's 15 songs last almost an hour. Guests include Winston McCall of Australian metalcore band
Parkway   Drive,   who   contributes   a   ﬁerce   vocal   part   to   "Impermanence".   Mike   Kerr,   vocalist   with   fellow
Brighton band Royal Blood, appears on "Little Wonder". Guitarists Adam Christianson and Josh Middleton
make for a well-attuned partnership, while Searle's drumming and Alex Dean on bass are a formidable
rhythm section. Carter moves coherently between different vocal modes. But the overall results are solid
rather than impressive.

Efforts are made to challenge the band's usual sound, a necessary act of adaptation considering the album's
portrait of a world hurtling to disaster unless it changes its ways. "Dead Butterﬂies" and "Flight without
Feathers" hint at expansive prog-rock balladry, while "Little Wonder" has a taut electro-rock spine. But the
metalcore formula of brutal riffs and singsong choruses prevails. Its Manichean dialogue between forces of
violence and harmony carries a moral charge but also a sense of stuckness.

â˜…â˜…â˜…â˜†â˜†

' For Those That Wish to Exist ' is released by Epitaph Records




 


