

Financial Times (web site)
Saturday, February 20, 2021 - Z 498 mots

Climate graphic of the week: Polar vortex sends Texas into
deep freeze

Leslie Hook and Steven Bernard

As freezing temperatures descended across Texas this week, scientists were trying to answer one central
question: had this event been made more likely by climate change?

From an atmospheric point of view, the Texas deep freeze was caused by a giant bend in the jet stream, the
fast-moving band of air 10km above the earth's surface that plays a central role in the weather of North
America and Europe.

The jet stream separates the cold polar air of the north from the warmer air of the tropics, and when it gets
wavy the cold air can end up farther south than usual (or warm air can end up farther north).

Tim Woollings, professor of physics at Oxford university, says that the jet stream has been behaving in
unusual ways this winter in the northern hemisphere.

"The jet this winter has been quite disturbed and has moved around a lot, and one of these meanderings is a
direct cause of what happened in Texas," he said. "It is kind of unexpected. The seasonal forecast for this
winter didn't really predict this kind of thing."

However, Woollings added it was not clear that the Texas freeze had been made more likely because of
global warming.

"Freak weather events will happen, and they are not all necessarily linked to climate change," said Woollings,
who is also the author of the book Jet Stream: A Journey Through Our Changing Climate.

One topic of great debate among scientists of the atmosphere is whether the jet stream is becoming weaker
and wavier as a result of global warming, or whether the opposite might be true, making the jet stream
stronger and pushing it further north.

Woollings said that more evidence had been building in recent years behind the theory of a stronger jet
stream, but also noted that the matter was still far from decided. "[The Texas freeze] is not part of a direct
trend, not an example of the jet becoming wavier in general," he said.

One reason for the disturbed jet stream could be an earlier disruption in the stratospheric polar vortex, a
mass of cold air that sits more than 30km above the earth's surface in the arctic region, he added.

The term "polar vortex" is also used to refer to the cold air that sits on the poleward side of the jet stream, in
the troposphere, which is the lowest layer of the atmosphere.

Philip Duffy, president of the Woodwell Climate Research Center in Woods Hole, Massachusetts, said that
climate change was causing more extreme weather in the continental US.

"It is wrong to view climate change as simply a gradual warming process," he added. "In some cases weather
becomes more variable, with more extremes in both directions." He pointed to the example of extreme
winter snow in the eastern US, which has increased over the past century, according to data from the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration.



 


