

Financial Times (web site)
Sunday, March 7, 2021 - Z 645 mots

Germany urges new outreach to Moscow on climate
change

Michael Peel in Brussels

Germany has called for greater co-operation with Russia on climate change in a contentious new effort to
restore frayed EU ties with Moscow.

The European bloc should develop a "concrete and detailed strategy" on global warming as part of a broader
attempt to "selectively engage" the Kremlin, according to a document drawn up by Berlin ahead of EU
leaders' talks on Russia this month.

The German proposal highlights deepening EU internal divisions over how to handle Russia. The detention of
poisoned opposition activist Alexei Navalny has put further strain on a relationship hobbled since Moscow
annexed Crimea in 2014 and the European bloc retaliated with economic sanctions.

While some EU capitals including Paris have favoured engaging with Moscow, a growing group of member
states including the Baltic countries and Poland see it as unrealistic and unwise in the face of the Kremlin's
behaviour.

"While a fundamental change in Russia's foreign policy appears unrealistic in the short term, managing our
challenging relationship with Russia must remain a key foreign policy priority of the European Union," states
the new German document, which has been seen by the Financial Times. "At the same time, the EU has to
forcefully seize opportunities to push Russia towards taking more responsibility for global goods such as
security, conﬂict resolution, climate, environment, health, trade or migration."

The German proposal is an unsigned and undated "non-paper", which EU countries use to air ideas without
having to take formal responsibility for them. A German ofﬁcial said the government did not comment on
alleged leaks as a matter of principle.

The document accuses Russia of violations of international law, a clampdown on civil society, and campaigns
to inﬂuence neighbouring states and use propaganda and cyber attacks to "divide Europeans".

But it also notes that Russia has an "indispensable", if "often difﬁcult", role in various global policy ﬁelds,
meaning   the   EU   had   a   "vital   interest"   in   stable   and   predictable   relations.   Scope   exists   for   possible
engagement with Moscow on conﬂicts in the Middle East and north Africa, global environmental and health
problems,   and   economic   themes   such   as   digitalisation,   hydrogen   power   and   the   Russian-led   Eurasian
Economic Union alliance, the document states.

The EU should seek, in particular, to "develop structured, concrete and detailed strategy on how to engage
Russia in multilateral efforts to ﬁght climate change", according to the ﬁrst of three points for immediate
action proposed by the document. The other two are to start high-level EU-US consultations on Russia and
to set up a Russia civil society fund to ﬁnance projects involving non-governmental groups in the country,
the EU and the six nations in the European bloc's "Eastern Partnership" initiative - Ukraine, Belarus, Georgia,
Armenia, Azerbaijan and Moldova.

"While so far not a policy priority for Russia, environmental disasters and climate change effects felt in its
territory become increasingly relevant for Russia's population and thus for the government," the document
states, adding that the European bloc should approach Moscow "at a time of our own choosing".

The hopes for greater co-operation contrast with the EU's imposition of new sanctions on Russia last week
over the Navalny case and an ofﬁcial crackdown on street protests against his treatment. The Kremlin also
triggered an outcry in Brussels and some European capitals last month over its expulsion of three European
diplomats and its aggressive posture during a trip to Moscow by Josep Borrell, EU foreign policy chief.

Critics of Berlin say its policy towards Moscow is compromised by its participation in the almost-complete
Nord Stream 2 project to pipe gas from Russia to Germany.





The German document carries echoes of a controversial 2019 proposal by Markus Ederer, EU ambassador to
Moscow, for "enhanced co-ordination" with Russia in areas from 5G mobile communication to personal data
protection to combat China's growing inﬂuence in Eurasia.




