 UK weather: thunderstorms and torrential rain to follow soaring temperatures UK’s hot weather will turn wet from Thursday afternoon, forecasters warn PA Media Thu 25 Jun 2020 07.15 BST 


 Soaring temperatures across the UK will be followed by thunderstorms and torrential rain over coming days, forecasters have warned.  Wednesday was the hottest day of the year so far but the Met Oﬃce said Thursday could beat that record, with temperatures expected to climb in the Midlands and Wales.  However, thunderstorms are expected to form across the west of the UK in the afternoon, bringing heavy rain, lighting and hail.  West London is forecast to see temperatures peak between 32C and 33C, while parts of Wales could see the mercury rise to 34C.   Should that happen, it would be the hottest June on record in Wales, surpassing the previous peak of 33.7C on 18 June 2000.  Met Oﬃce meteorologist John Griﬃths said the Midlands could see temperatures reach 32C on Thursday, while the Welsh Marches – the area along the Welsh border – could see temperatures of 34C “very locally”.  The hot weather is expected to turn from 4pm on Thursday as thunderstorms form in the south-west and south-east of England, Wales, western Scotland and Northern Ireland.  The Met Oﬃce has issued a yellow weather alert for those areas until 9am on Friday, warning of disruption due to ﬂooding, lightning strikes, hail and wind. Between 30mm to 40mm of rain could fall in less than two hours.  The storms are expected to continue from midday on Friday through to 6am on Saturday, with another yellow warning in place for the whole of the UK.  Areas hit by the storms could experience “torrential downpours” with 30-50mm of rain falling in an hour.  On Wednesday the mercury peaked at 32.6C at London’s Heathrow airport at 2.46pm.  The hot weather saw people ﬂock to beaches in huge numbers despite social distancing measures remaining in place.  Bournemouth beach as temperatures rose across the UK. Photograph: Andrew Matthews/PA The Met Oﬃce raised its heat alert level to three, as health authorities encouraged those most vulnerable – many of whom have been shielding during lockdown – to protect themselves amid the “exceptionally hot weather forecast this week”.  Public Health England (PHE) said older people, those with underlying health conditions, and very young children were all more at risk from the higher temperatures.  The amber level three, which remains in place for the east and West Midlands, requires social and healthcare services to target speciﬁc actions at high-risk groups, according to the Met Oﬃce website.  People have been advised to keep cool and stay hydrated where possible.   The Met Oﬃce said UV levels were expected to remain at eight across many parts of the UK on Thursday.  People cool oﬀ in the water and sunbathe on the riverbank at Hackney Marshes in east London. Photograph: Tolga Akmen/AFP /Getty Images Dr Michaela Hegglin, associate professor in atmospheric chemistry at the University of Reading’s department of meteorology, said Thursday could see some of the “highest UV levels ever recorded” in Britain.  She said: “This is because of a combination of factors. We are at the summer solstice, when the sun is almost directly overhead at one o’clock.  “UV levels this high are rare in the UK, so people with light skin should be very careful to avoid getting burnt. While UV is important for getting vitamin D and keeping us healthy, too much of it can cause skin cancer or eye cataracts.”  Emer O’Connell, consultant in public health at PHE, said it was important that people kept checking on the vulnerable, as many continued to spend more time at home due to coronavirus.  Shoppers have also been advised to be aware they could be forced to spend extra time in the sun as a result of social distancing measures. And dog owners have been urged to avoid exercising their pets during the hottest part of the day.  The public is also being reminded to take care around water throughout the summer, amid concerns people might be tempted to take a dip to cool down. Thames Valley police said on Wednesday oﬃcers had found a body, following a search for a missing man who is believed to have got into diﬃculty in the water at Lulle Brook in Cookham, Berkshire, on Tuesday. 