

The New York Times (web site)
Thursday, March 25, 2021 -  1187 mots

What’s Going On in This Graph? | Global Climate Risks

By The Learning Network

What   are   the   primary   climate   risks   around   the   world   that   could   be   faced   by   2040   if   greenhouse-gas
emissions are not cut drastically?

Students in U.S. high schools can get free digital access to The New York Times until Sept. 1, 2021.

This map shows the world’s top climate risks by 2040 if greenhouse-gas emissions are not cut drastically.

After looking closely at the map above (or at this full-size image), answer these four questions:

What do you notice? What do you wonder?

What impact does this have on you and your community?What’s going on in this map? Write a catchy
headline that captures the map’s main idea.

The questions are intended to build on one another, so try to answer them in order.

2. Next, join the conversation online by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box. (Teachers of
students younger than 13 are welcome to post their students’ responses.)

3. Below the response box, there is an option for students to click on “Email me when my comment is
published.” This sends the link to their response which they can share with their teacher.

4. After you have posted, read what others have said, then respond to someone else by posting a comment.
Use the “Reply” button to address that student directly.

On Wednesday, March 31, teachers from our collaborator, the American Statistical Association, will facilitate
this discussion from 9 a.m. to 2 p.m. Eastern time.

5. By Friday morning, April 2, we will reveal more information about the graph, including a free link to the
article that included this graph, at the bottom of this post. We encourage you to post additional comments
based on the article, possibly using statistical terms deﬁned in the Stat Nuggets.

The Reveal

The United States has experienced what seems to be an unrelenting series of climate disasters: ﬂooding on
the Mississippi, heat stress in the Upper Midwest, drought in the Mountain states, wildﬁres on the West Coast
and hurricanes and sea rise along the East Coast. So, too, has the rest of the world had severe climate
disasters. This map is a graph (see below Stat Nugget) that shows what we could expect if greenhouse-gas
emissions are not cut drastically. Ways to accomplish this include adoption of electric cars (see November 20,
2019 and January 21, 2021 graphs) plus President Biden’s plans to rejoin the Paris climate agreement, cancel
the Keystone XL pipeline permit and roll back vehicle emission standards.

This map appeared January 31, 2021 in The New York Times article “Everyone Has Its Own Climate Risks.
What’s Yours?” It is based on a report prepared by Four Twenty Seven, Inc., a California-based climate risk
data ﬁrm that measures the physical risks of climate change.  The   report  focuses   on projections   of   the
percentage of agriculture, people and economic activity that is exposed to high-risk climate hazards. In this
map, only the primary climate risk by region is represented. This does not tell the full story. More than two-
thirds of the world’s countries have two or more risks. The United States has regions with each of the six risks:
ﬂooding,   heat   stress,   water   stress,   wildﬁres,   hurricanes   and   typhoons   and   sea   level   rise.   Worldwide,
FourTwentySeven projects that roughly 90 percent of the world’s population – rich and poor countries alike,
will be exposed to one or more threats arising from global warming.

Here are some of the student headlines we received online that capture the story of these graphs: “Climate
Change’s True Colors” by Kiernan and “Stop Greenhouse Gases Before It’s Too Late!” by Paige, both from
Alaska, and “Impacts of Climate Change Will Be Devastating If Nothing Changes” by Julia of Memphis,

 





Tennessee.


You may want to think critically about these questions:

Estimating from the graph, which risk (ﬂooding, heat stress, water stress, wildﬁres, hurricanes and typhoons
and sea level rise) covers the greatest land area? Alternatively, based on what you know about where the
world’s population lives, which risk affects the most people?

The above graph is also from the report prepared by Four Twenty Seven.

What do you notice? What do you wonder? What is the greatest risk to each exposure category? For each
risk, which exposure category has the greatest risk? Write a summary that explains the global risks?

A 2020 survey by the Yale Program on Climate Change Communication has found that while 61 percent of
Americans say climate change poses a risk in the United States, only 43 percent think it will affect them
personally. Why do you think that people tend to believe climate change is something “far away in time and
space?” What do you recommend to shift this mindset?Based on global climate risks, where is the safest
place to live? Of these places, where would you prefer to live?

Stat Nuggets for “Everyone Has Its Own Climate Risks. What’s Yours?”

To see the archives of all Stat Nuggets with links to their graphs, go to this index.

MAP AS A GRAPH

A map can be a graph when the map shows data or statistics with their geographic relationship.

In the Global Climate Risks map, the highest ranked climate risk for each region is the statistic shown on the
map. The color of the region indicates which climate risk - ﬂooding, heat stress, water stress, wildﬁres,
hurricanes and typhoons and sea level rise, is ranked ﬁrst for the region. The region is marked with the
corresponding color for the greatest risk. Other risks are not noted. For example, the primary risk in California
is wildﬁres. These are caused, in part, by water and heat stress, which is not noted on the map. Globally,
wildﬁre risk regions are usually adjacent to water stress and heat stress areas.

________

The graphs for “What’s Going On in This Graph?” are selected in partnership with Sharon Hessney. Ms.
Hessney wrote the “reveal” and the Stat Nuggets with Erica Chauvet, mathematics professor at Waynesburg
University in Pennsylvania,  and  moderates  online  with  Heather  Overstreet,  statistics  teacher  at  Franklin
County High School in Rocky Mount, Virginia.

More?

• See all graphs in this series or a slide show of 60 of our favorite graphs.

• View our archives that link to all past releases, organized by topic, graph type and Stat Nugget.

• Learn more about the “Notice and Wonder” teaching strategy and how and why other teachers are using
this feature from our on-demand webinar.

• Sign up for our free weekly Learning Network newsletter so you never miss a graph. Graphs are always
released by the Friday before the Wednesday live-moderation to give teachers time to plan ahead.

•   Go   to   the   American   Statistical   Association   K-12   website,   which   includes   teacher   statistics   resources,
professional development opportunities, and more.

Students 13 and older in the United States and the United Kingdom, and 16 and older elsewhere, are invited
to comment. All comments are moderated by the Learning Network staff, but please keep in mind that once
your comment is accepted, it will be made public.




 


