

The New York Times (web site)
Friday, March 26, 2021 -  322 mots

Biden invites world leaders, including Putin and Xi, to a
climate summit.

By David E. Sanger

President Biden on Friday invited 40 world leaders, including Presidents Vladimir V. Putin of Russia and Xi
Jinping of China, to participate in a climate summit next month.

The summit will begin on Earth Day, April 22. Like all of Mr. Biden’s international meetings so far, it will be
held virtually, and a White House announcement said it would be “live streamed for public viewing.”

That format may ensure a fair bit of public posturing by the leaders on how climate is an issue on which they
can all work together — and it eliminates the potential problem of “pull aside” meetings on other topics with
American adversaries. Over the past 10 days, Mr. Biden has called Mr. Putin a “killer” and said that Mr. Xi did
not   have   a   democratic   “bone   in   his   body.”   But   he   has   promised   to   cooperate   with   them   on   common
challenges.

The summit is part of an effort to get the United States and its partners back on track after Mr. Biden re-
entered the Paris agreement, the global pact intended to avert catastrophic global warming. It is his chance
to galvanize efforts to reduce emissions, set standards for limiting the warming of the atmosphere, and
make good on his promise that efforts to stem climate change can also create jobs.

Among the invitees are the leaders of all the United States’ major European and Asian allies, along with
Prime Minister Narendra Modi of India and the leaders of some tiny nations such as Bhutan and the Marshall
Islands.

Mr. Biden invited King Salman of Saudi Arabia but not the de facto leader of the country, Crown Prince
Mohammed bin Salman. The United States said in an intelligence report last month that Prince Mohammed
had approved the operation that led to the killing of the journalist and dissident Jamal Khashoggi, which had
prompted an international outcry.




 


