

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
Business/Financial, Friday, February 19, 2021 960 mots, p. B 6

Institutions Have to Face Climate Change Reality, Top
Ofﬁcial at Fed Says

By Jeanna Smialek

A top Federal Reserve ofﬁcial says climate scenario analysis could be valuable in making sure that banks
mind their climate-tied weak spots.

A top Federal Reserve ofﬁcial issued a stark warning on Thursday morning: Banks and other lenders need to
prepare themselves for the realities of a world racked by climate change, and regulators must play a key role
in ensuring that they do.

"Climate change is already imposing substantial economic costs and is projected to have a profound effect
on   the   economy   at   home   and   abroad,"   Lael   Brainard,   one   of   the   central   bank's   six   Washington-based
governors, said at an Institute of International Finance event.

"Financial institutions that do not put in place frameworks to measure, monitor and manage climate-related
risks could face outsized losses on climate-sensitive assets caused by environmental shifts, by a disorderly
transition to a low-carbon economy or by a combination of both," she continued.

The grim backdrop to her comments is the abnormally cold weather walloping Texas -- leaving millions
without electricity and underlining the fact that state and local authorities in some places are underprepared
for severe weather that is expected to become more frequent.

Such disruptions also matter for the ﬁnancial system. They pose risks to insurers, can disrupt the payment
system and make otherwise reasonable ﬁnancial bets dicey. That is why it is important for  the Fed   to
understand and plan for them, central bank ofﬁcials have increasingly said.

Ms. Brainard pointed out Thursday that ﬁnancial companies were addressing the risk by "responding to
investors' demands for climate-friendly portfolios," among other changes. But she added that regulators like
the Fed must also adapt. She raised the possibility that bank overseers might need new supervisory tools,
given the challenges associated with climate oversight, which include long time horizons and limited data
due to the lack of precedent.

"Scenario analysis may be a helpful tool" to assess "implications of climate-related risks under a wide range of
assumptions," Ms. Brainard said, though she was careful to distinguish that such scenarios would be distinct
from full-ﬂedged stress tests.

Weighing in on climate risks publicly is new territory for the Fed. Ofﬁcials spent years tiptoeing around the
topic, which is politically charged in the United States. The central bank only fully joined a global coalition
dedicated to research on girding the ﬁnancial system against climate risk late last year. The possibility of
climate-tied stress tests has been especially contentious, and has recently drawn criticism from Republican
lawmakers.

"We   have   seen   banks   make   politically   motivated   and   public   relations-focused   decisions   to   limit   credit
availability   to   these   industries,"   more   than   40   House   Republican   lawmakers   said   in   a   December   letter,
speciﬁcally referring to coal, oil and gas. They added that "climate change stress tests could perpetuate this
trend, allowing regulated banks to cite negative impacts on their supervisory tests as an excuse to defund or
divest from these crucial industries."

Jerome H. Powell, the Fed chair, and Randal K. Quarles, the vice chair for supervision -- both named to their
jobs   by   President   Donald   J.   Trump   --   suggested   in   response   that   the   Fed   was   in   the   early   stages   of
researching its role in climate oversight.

"We would note that it has long been the policy of the Federal Reserve to not dictate to banks what lawful
industries they can and cannot serve, as those business decisions should be made solely by each institution,"

 





they wrote last month.


Mr. Powell and Mr. Quarles echoed the lawmakers' assertion that the Fed's bank stress tests measured bank
capital needs over a much shorter time frame than climate change, though they said the Fed was working
to help banks manage their risks, including those related to climate.

The central bank is quickly moving toward greater activism on the topic. Its Supervision Climate Committee,
announced last month, will work "to develop an appropriate program" to supervise banks's climate-related
risks, Ms. Brainard said Thursday. The Fed is also co-chair of a task force on climate-related ﬁnancial risks at
the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, a global regulatory group.

Though the central bank is politically independent, President Biden has placed climate at the center of his
administration's economic priorities. Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen has pledged to "ﬁght the climate
crisis."

Ms. Brainard, the Fed's last remaining governor appointed solely by President Barack Obama, has been a
leading voice in pushing for greater attention to climate issues, speaking on the matter at a conference in
2019. So has Mary C. Daly, president of the Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco, who held that conference.
(Mr. Powell was initially appointed by Mr. Obama, but then elevated to chair under Mr. Trump.)

"It is a fact that severe weather events are increasing," Ms. Daly said during a webcast event this week, noting
that "half the country is in a winter storm, and then in the summer they'll be in a heat wave."

She said the Fed needed to ﬁgure out how to deal with potentially disruptive risks as they emerged given
that it is responsible for the nation&#39;s economic health, works with other regulators to protect the safety
of the ﬁnancial system and is the steward of the payments system -- the guts of the ﬁnancial system in
which money is transferred and checks are processed.

"We have to understand what the risks are, and think about how those risks can be mitigated," Ms. Daly said.
"Our responsibility is to look forward, and ask not just what is happening today, but what are the risks."




 


