

The New York Times (web site)
Thursday, March 25, 2021 -  1154 mots

His Game Made Beating a Pandemic Fun. Can He Do It for
Climate Change?

By Alex Marshall

Matt Leacock, the inventor of the hit board game Pandemic, has spent the past year making a game about
an even weightier subject.

The Earth’s average temperature unexpectedly leapt 0.4 degrees Celsius on Saturday afternoon, putting the
planet on the brink of catastrophe. Within hours, millions of people would be displaced, crops would fail and
sea levels would rise.

Until,   that   is,   Matt   Leacock   realized   that   the   four   people   playing   Climate Crisis,   a   board   game   he   is
developing, had gotten the rules wrong.

“No, divide it by four!” he told the players, who were testing the game. They had been counting a pile of
brown   cubes,   representing   greenhouse   gas   emissions,   to   calculate   how   much   the   world’s   temperature
would increase. They’d just forgotten to divide the ﬁgure by the number of players.

The players — all experts from the Red Cross Red Crescent Climate Center, playing online and linked up via a
video call — looked relieved. But it wasn’t all good news. “There might be some forest ﬁres in China, and
Europe and the United States soon,” Leacock said.

Leacock, 49, is one of the biggest names in board games. In 2008, he brought out Pandemic, a game in
which players cooperate to stop outbreaks of ﬁctitious viruses worldwide, while also developing long-term
cures. That game has sold over two million copies, and over the past year, interest and sales have surged —
for obvious reasons.

If the idea of making a fun game about surging diseases sounds like a tall order, Leacock said making
entertainment out of climate change was even tougher. “I haven’t ever tried to create a game that was
faithful to science before,” he said in a telephone interview from Sunnyvale, Calif., where he lives.

Pandemic was about creating a sense of tension, he said, but the new game, with a working title of Climate
Crisis, has “higher ambitions.” In addition to being entertaining, he hopes it can change people’s actions in
the real world.

“I’ve got a big opportunity to come up with a cooperative game that makes a difference,” he said. “I don’t
want to blow it.”

Three other board game designers said in telephone interviews that Climate Crisis sounded like a tough
project. “Most people think of games as a thing they do as an escape from everyday life,” said Elizabeth
Hargrave, the creator of Wingspan, in which players compete to attract birds to nature reserves. “It’s hard to
wrap my head around how to make a game about a real life — very dire — situation fun,” she added.

But, she said, “If anyone can do it, it’s Matt Leacock.”

Leacock ﬁrst considered making a game about climate change in August 2019 after a British academic sent
him an email suggesting that he tweak Pandemic to make it about that theme. Leacock dismissed the
notion, he said, “but then another person reached out with that idea, then another person.”

Last March, he decided to give it a go. So as much of the world went into lockdown and looked for escapist
entertainment, he began reading extensively on climate change.

“I immediately fell into a big trough of despair,” Leacock said. “Climate crisis books are a rough bunch, in that
they all start with laying out the crisis, trying to make you realize the gravity of the situation.”

He dragged himself out of that hole, he said, only after he began collaborating with Matteo Menapace, an
Italian game designer in London. Together, they investigated proposed solutions to the crisis, reading up on

 





things   like   clean   energy   rollouts   and   geoengineering   projects   that   remove   carbon   dioxide   from   the
atmosphere.


Leacock realized that it wasn’t just a story of doom and gloom.

“That was really important, as in order to create any game, you need to ﬁgure out how players can win,” he
said. “Once we had a beat on that, we started making progress.”

As it stands, Climate Crisis (which is still in development) involves four players taking on the roles of the
United States, Europe, China and the Global South, with the collective goal of lowering greenhouse gas
emissions so that the Earth’s temperature stops increasing.

The game proceeds in rounds, representing four-year periods, from the present day to 2050. In each round,
players   lay   down   cards   representing   emissions-cutting   policies,   such   as   building   solar   power   plants   or
increasing food waste recycling. Their carbon totals are represented by brown cubes that get piled up in the
middle of the board, and red counters move along a cartoon thermometer as the Earth’s temperature goes
up.

Leacock said he was trying to make the game scientiﬁcally accurate by seeking feedback from experts, such
as the four Climate Center employees who played on Saturday. “I don’t want to be the climate dude who
comes in and says, ‘Hey, I know the answer,’” he said.

But accuracy adds complexity. Leacock has to ensure that the game didn’t become overly detailed if he
wants it to be popular, said Vital Lacerda, another game designer.

Lacerda made his own climate change game, called CO2, and its rule book stretched to 26 pages, he said.
(The game’s audience was small, he added.)

Leacock said he had realized that pitfall. Climate Crisis has already gone through over 70 versions, and there
are   still   months   of   work   ahead.   He   spent   three   years   on   Pandemic   while   working   full-time   as   a   user
experience designer at Yahoo.

Menapace, Leacock’s collaborator, said the biggest issue they were now grappling with was how to create a
sense of pace and suspense. During one recent test run, the players thought they were doing well for three
rounds, but then the temperature shot up and the game came to an abrupt end.

“We almost simulated the idea the planet’s sleepwalking into disaster,” Menapace said, “which might be a
good representation of how things are in the world, but it’s not great from a gameplay perspective.”

At Saturday’s test run, a lack of excitement did not seem to be a problem. After a few rounds, the players
from the Climate Center all piled their blocks into the middle of the board and worked out what that meant
for the climate. World temperatures jumped 0.2 degrees Celsius in an instant.

As the temperature climbed, a counter landed on a space representing a melting ice sheet: The Earth was
now reﬂecting less sunlight, and the temperature increased a little further. In the fallout from that, the
players now faced a refugee crisis.

Erin Coughlan de Perez, who was playing the United States, said the tumbling crises were “an excellent way
of showing the feedback loops involved in climate change.”

Yet her smile as the disaster unfurled was a sign of something else: She was enjoying the game.


 





 


