

The New York Times (web site)
Wednesday, April 7, 2021 -  1402 mots

How Debt and Climate Change Pose ‘Systemic Risk’ to
World Economy

By Somini Sengupta

With dozens of countries struggling to manage both staggering debt and mounting climate disasters, some
ﬁnancial leaders are calling for green debt relief.

How does a country deal with climate disasters when it’s drowning in debt? Not very well, it turns out.
Especially not when a global pandemic clobbers its economy.

Take   Belize,   Fiji   and   Mozambique.   Vastly   different   countries,   they   are   among   dozens   of   nations   at   the
crossroads   of   two   mounting   global   crises   that   are   drawing   the   attention   of   international   ﬁnancial
institutions: climate change and debt.

They owe staggering amounts of money to various foreign lenders. They face staggering climate risks, too.
And now, with the coronavirus pandemic pummeling their economies, there is a growing recognition that
their debt obligations stand in the way of meeting the immediate needs of their people — not to mention
the investments required to protect them from climate disasters.

The combination of debt, climate change and environmental degradation “represents a systemic risk to the
global economy that may trigger a cycle that depresses revenues, increases spending and exacerbates
climate   and   nature   vulnerabilities,”   according   to   a   new   assessment   by   the   World   Bank,   International
Monetary Fund and others, which was seen by The Times. It comes after months of pressure from academics
and advocates for lenders to address this problem.

The bank and the I.M.F., whose top ofﬁcials are meeting this week, are planning talks in the next few months
with debtor countries, creditors, advocates and ratings agencies to ﬁgure out how to make new money
available for what they call a green economic recovery. The goal is to come up with concrete proposals
before the international climate talks in November and ultimately, to get buy-in from the world’s wealthiest
countries, including China, which is the largest single creditor country in the world.

Kristalina Georgieva, the managing director of the I.M.F., said in an emailed statement that green recovery
programs had the potential to spur ambitious climate action in developing countries, “especially at a time
they face ﬁscal constraints because of the impact of the pandemic on their economies.”

One of the countries at the crossroads of the climate and debt crises is Belize, a middle-income country on
the Caribbean coast of Central America. Its foreign debt had been steadily rising for the last few years. It was
also feeling some of the most acute effects of climate change: sea level rise, bleached corals, coastal erosion.
The pandemic dried up tourism, a mainstay of its economy. Then, after two hurricanes, Eta and Iota, hit
neighboring Guatemala, ﬂoods swept away farms and roads downstream in Belize.

Today, the debt that Belize owes its foreign creditors is equal to 85 percent of its entire national economy. The
private credit ratings agency Standard &amp; Poor’s has downgraded its creditworthiness, making it tougher
to get loans on the private market. The International Monetary Fund calls its debt levels “unsustainable.”

Belize, said Christopher Coye, the country’s minister of state for ﬁnance, needs immediate debt relief to deal
with the effects of global warming that it had little role in creating.

“How do we pursue climate action?” he said. “We are ﬁscally constrained at this point.”

“We should be compensated for suffering the excesses of others and supported in mitigating and adapting
to climate change effects — certainly in the form of debt relief and concessionary funding,” Mr. Coye said.

Many Caribbean countries like Belize do not qualify for low-interest loans that poorer countries are eligible
for.



The United Nations said Thursday that the global economic collapse endangered nearly $600 billion in debt

 



service payments over the next ﬁve years. Both the World Bank and the International Monetary Fund are
important lenders, but so are rich countries, as well as private banks and bondholders. The global ﬁnancial
system would face a huge problem if countries faced with shrinking economies defaulted on their debts.s


“We cannot walk head on, eyes wide open, into a debt crisis that is foreseeable and preventable,” the United
Nations Secretary General, António Guterres, said last week as he called for debt relief for a broad range of
countries. “Many developing countries face ﬁnancing constraints that mean they cannot invest in recovery
and resilience.”

The Biden administration, in an executive order on climate change, said it would use its voice in international
ﬁnancial institutions, like the World Bank, to align debt relief with the goals of the Paris climate agreement,
though it hasn’t yet detailed what that means.

The   discussions   around   debt   and   climate   are   likely   to   intensify   in   the   run   up   to   the   climate   talks   in
November, where money is expected to be one of the main sticking points. Rich nations are nowhere close
to   delivering   the   promised   $100   billion   a   year   to   help   poorer   countries   deal   with   the   effects   of   global
warming. Low- and middle-income countries alone owed $8.1 trillion to foreign lenders in 2019, the most
recent year for which the data is available — and that was before the pandemic.

At the time, half of all countries that the World Bank classiﬁed as low-income were either in what it called
“debt distress or at a high risk of it.” Many of those are also acutely vulnerable to climate change, including
more frequent droughts, stronger hurricanes and rising sea levels that wash away coastlines.

(The fund said on Monday that it would not require 28 of the world’s poorest countries to make debt
payments through October, so their governments can use the money on emergency pandemic-related
relief.)

Lately, there’s been a ﬂurry of proposals from economists, advocates and others to address the problem. The
details vary. But they all call, in one way or another, for rich countries and private creditors to offer debt relief,
so countries can use those funds to transition away from fossil fuels, adapt to the effects of climate change,
or obtain ﬁnancial reward for the natural assets they already protect, like forests and wetlands. One widely
circulated proposal calls on the Group of 20 (the world’s 20 biggest economies) to require lenders to offer
relief “in exchange for a commitment to use some of the newfound ﬁscal space for a green and inclusive
recovery.”

On the other side of the world from Belize, the low-lying Paciﬁc island nation of Fiji has experienced a
succession of storms in recent years that brought destruction and the need to borrow money to rebuild. The
pandemic brought an economic downturn. In December, tropical cyclone Yasa destroyed homes and crops.
Fiji’s debts soared, including to China, and the country, whose very existence is threatened by sea level rise,
pared back planned climate projects, according to research by the World Resources Institute.

The authors proposed what they called a climate-health-debt swap, where bilateral creditors, namely China,
would forgive some of the debt in exchange for climate and health care investments. (China has said nothing
publicly about the idea of debt swaps.)

And then there’s Mozambique. The sixth-poorest country in the world.

It was already sinking under huge debts, including secret loans that the government had not disclosed,
when, in 2019, came back-to-back cyclones. They killed 1,000 people and left physical damages costing more
than $870 million. Mozambique took on more loans to cope. Then came the pandemic. The I.M.F. says the
country is in debt distress.

Six   countries   on   the   continent   are   in   debt   distress,   and   many   more   have   seen   their   credit   ratings
downgraded by private ratings agencies. In March, ﬁnance ministers from across Africa said that many of
their countries had spent a sizable chunk of their budgets already to deal with extreme weather events like
droughts and ﬂoods, and some countries were spending a tenth of their budgets on climate   adaptation
efforts. “Our ﬁscal buffers are now truly depleted,” they wrote.

In developing countries, the share of government revenues that go into paying foreign debts nearly tripled to
17.4 percent between 2011 and 2020, an analysis by Eurodad, a debt relief advocacy group found.

Research suggests that climate   risks   have   already   made   it   more   expensive   for   developing   countries   to
borrow money. The problem is projected to get worse. A recent paper found climate change will raise the
cost of borrowing for many more countries as early as 2030 unless efforts are made to sharply reduce

 





greenhouse gas emissions.





 


