

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
National, Wednesday, March 24, 2021 1348 mots, p. A 1

Biden's Big Infrastructure Push Puts Climate Fight at
Forefront

By Lisa Friedman and Jim Tankersley

The president's plan, worth up to $4 trillion, represents a fundamental shift in the way Democrats talk about
tackling climate change: It's no longer a side issue.

WASHINGTON   --   President   Biden's   next   big   thing   would   fuse   the   rebuilding   of   America's   creaky
infrastructure   with   record   spending   to   ﬁght   climate change,   a   combination   that,   in   scale   and   scope,
represents a huge political shift, even for Democrats who have been in the climate trenches for decades.

A guiding philosophy of the Biden proposal argues that the future of good jobs is the transition to an
economy that no longer churns out carbon dioxide through the burning of coal, oil and gas.

Aides are set to brief Mr. Biden this week on plans to invest between $3 trillion and $4 trillion in spending and
tax credits on a wide range of efforts meant to bolster the economy. The money is currently planned to be
split   between   two   packages,   starting   with   an   infrastructure   bill   that   is   rooted   in   the   effort   to   halt   the
emissions of planet-warming carbon dioxide. Administration ofﬁcials stress that the details remain in ﬂux.

But as currently constructed, accelerating a clean energy transformation underpins nearly every part of the
plan, people familiar with it said. It includes building electric power lines that can deliver more renewable
energy,   building   electric   vehicle   charging   stations,   capping   oil   and   gas   wells   to   reduce   emissions   and
reclaiming abandoned coal mines. There is money to build a million new affordable, energy-efﬁcient housing
units and to make existing structures more energy efﬁcient. Hundreds of billions of dollars would go toward
"high-growth industries of the future," such as advanced battery manufacturing.

The underlying message -- that the next step of America's economic recovery is fundamentally tied to
countering the climate crisis -- represents a major pivot in the way Democrats make the case for tackling
global warming. No longer merely an environmental imperative like saving the polar bears, or a side element
of   a   stimulus   package   like   it   was   under   the   Obama   administration,   climate change   has   become   the
centerpiece.

Administration ofﬁcials say they view averting catastrophic warming and pursuing American dominance of
the emerging global industries as inseparable. That is a sharp break from even the most recent Democratic
administration, when Mr. Biden was vice president, let alone the Trump era, when the president denied the
existence of climate change.

"Thinking about addressing climate change through infrastructure is in itself not a revolutionary idea, but if
you said to most people, 'Is America's infrastructure in trouble?' I think the ﬁrst words they would mention to
you are bridges and roads, not E.V. charging stations," said Robert N. Stavins, an environmental economist at
Harvard University.

White House ofﬁcials would not put a dollar ﬁgure on the amount dedicated to climate change, but one
person familiar with the talks said climate and clean energy spending could exceed $2 trillion.

Some climate activists say the plan suffers from a lopsided approach that would increase the supply of clean-
energy   projects   and   products   while   doing   little   to   spur   demand   by   forcing   reductions   in   fossil   fuel
consumption.

Republicans, who unanimously opposed Mr. Biden's $1.9 trillion coronavirus stimulus package, and even
some independent analysts recoil at wrapping climate policy in the widely popular mantle of infrastructure,
which raises old arguments against government-driven industrial policy.

Senator John Barrasso, Republican of Wyoming, said in a statement that Mr. Biden should focus on working
with Republicans "to ﬁx America's crumbling roads and bridges," rather than "raise taxes while also spending

 





trillions on a bill that includes the punishing regulations of the Green New Deal."


But Mr. Biden is not straying from his recent positions. He promised during his campaign to "build a more
resilient, sustainable economy" that puts the United States on a path to achieve net-zero emissions by
midcentury, while creating "millions of good paying jobs." He has continued to hit the theme since his
inauguration.

"Today is climate day at the White House, which means that today is jobs day," the president said in January
before signing a suite of executive orders to combat warming.

Along with more than $600 billion for the construction of roads, bridges, rail lines, and electric vehicle
charging stations, the infrastructure package will incorporate some form of a rebate program championed
by Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the majority leader, to replace millions of gas guzzling cars in the
next decade with electric vehicles.

Some environmental groups on Monday criticized Mr. Biden for not proposing an even bigger package for
climate change. But Representative Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez, Democrat of New York, who has championed
the Green New Deal, an aggressive plan to address climate change and revamp the economy, called reports
of the infrastructure package "encouraging."

"One of the big goals we had when we introduced the Green New Deal was to shift climate change from
being a billion dollar problem to a trillion dollar opportunity," Ms. Ocasio-Cortez said in an interview.

"The fact that climate and infrastructure is seen as part of the same endeavor is, I think, highly reﬂective of
that shift," she said.

So far, the package excludes the one thing that economists agree is the most efﬁcient way to draw down
planet-warming emissions: taxing or otherwise putting a price on the carbon dioxide emissions that cause it.
Instead of a gasoline tax, for instance, the president plans to greatly raise fuel efﬁciency standards for cars,
forcing automakers toward electric vehicles through regulation, not legislation. Similarly, Mr. Biden plans to
reimpose strict emissions regulations on electric power plants to move the sector away from coal.

"Biden never made a carbon tax the center of his proposal," said John Podesta, a former adviser to President
Barack Obama on climate change. "I think he believed that the combination of investments and standards
with a focus on equity was a winning formula both for the economy and was more politically viable."

Others, though, said they worried that Mr. Biden's strategy -- long-term projects and regulation that could
take years to ﬁnalize -- was too lengthy, too pricey and too uncertain to cut enough emissions.

"The scale of the climate problem demands the most economically efﬁcient response, and because it's
politically difﬁcult to talk about pricing carbon we're drifting toward a really expensive way of addressing
climate," said Alex Flint, executive director of the Alliance for Market Solutions, a conservative nonproﬁt group
that supports a carbon tax.

"A carbon tax at least has to be part of the discussion," Mr. Flint added.

Mr. Stavins of Harvard University cautioned that using government spending to achieve both job creation
and climate change, while popular, isn't always compatible. Quick boosts to the economy rely on so-called
"shovel-ready" projects -- and those aren't necessarily the ones that will lead to deep decarbonization.

But, he conceded, if Mr. Obama could not secure legislation to cap carbon emissions when he had 59
Democrats in the Senate, Mr. Biden cannot win a similarly tough plan with 50 Democrats, one of whom,
Senator Joe Manchin III, represents the coal state of West Virginia.

Supporters of the package say tying climate action to ﬁscal growth is good politics and grounded in fact. A
federal   report   in   2018   found   that   failing   to   curb   planet-warming   pollution   could   result   in   more   record
wildﬁres,   crop   failures   and   crumbled   infrastructure   across   the   country,   shrinking   the   U.S.   economy   10
percent by the end of the century.

Jamal Raad, who co-founded the climate advocacy group Evergreen Action, said both the politics of climate
change and the market for clean energy have changed dramatically over the past decade.

"There's been a whole lot of work telling a broader story about what climate change means and what the
transition to clean energy would mean for our economy and jobs," he said. "This investment package is about
telling a positive story about economic growth in clean energy."

 







