

The New York Times (web site)
Tuesday, February 16, 2021 -  352 mots

Climate change may explain frigid weather so far south,
experts say.

By John Schwartz

The notion that the global phenomenon of a hotter planet could be sending a shocking cold wave into the
southern United States might seem nonsensical. And every cold snap can be counted on to elicit quips and
stunts from those who deny the science of climate change.

But the weather patterns that send freezing air from the polar vortex plunging all the way to the Gulf Coast
could, like other forms of extreme weather, be linked to global warming — which is why the climate scientist
Katharine Hayhoe prefers the phrase “global weirding.”

Winter   storms   are   inﬂuenced   by   many   factors,   including   the   natural   variability   that   affects   all   weather
systems. The planet’s warming could be part of that icy blend, even while climate change is making winters
milder over all.

The air that usually sits over the Arctic is now sweeping down South because of changes to the jet stream,
the high-level air current that circles the Northern Hemisphere and usually holds back the frigid polar vortex.

Of course, bitter cold from the polar vortex has long been a part of the North American weather picture. Dr.
Amy Butler, a research scientist at the NOAA Chemical Sciences Laboratory, has said that she has yet to ﬁnd
any  long-term   trend   in   polar   vortex  disruptions,   which  “occur   naturally   even   in  the  absence  of  climate
change.”

But Judah Cohen, the director of seasonal forecasting at Atmospheric and Environmental Research, has
identiﬁed general trends in winter storms. He was an author of a paper last year in the journal Nature
Climate Change that found a sharp increase in Northeast winter storms from 2008 to 2018.

“Severe winter weather is much more frequent when the Arctic is warmest,” Dr. Cohen said, adding, “It’s not
in spite of climate change, but related to climate change.”

The current storm “could be one of the most costly natural disasters of the year,” he said, in part because of
its unusual geography: “Texas, which is known for hurricanes, is not known for snow and cold damage” like
burst water pipes.


