 Wednesday, December 22, 2021 - 00:00 1661 mots  The Year in Climate News By The New York Times  2021 was yet another year that felt like five. It began with a presidential transition, riots at the Capitol and a blackout in Texas. Before summer had even begun, drought, heat and fires had already torn across the West. The Biden administration faced a number of challenges to its climate agenda at home. And then came the United Nations international climate conference in Glasgow in the fall.  Feel like a blur? Here’s a recap of the year in our coverage.  Climate Change Is Here  In February, Texas went dark. Huge winter storms plunged large parts of the central and southern United States into an energy crisis.  Climate Change Means Trouble for Power Grids  By Brad Plumer  Despite inaccurate claims from Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas, we explained: No, the reason for the blackouts was not frozen wind turbines. The main problem was frigid temperatures that stalled natural gas production, which is responsible for the majority of Texas’ power supply.  Fast forward to early June, when it wasn’t technically summer yet, but the American Southwest was already baking and drying up.  It’s Some of America’s Richest Farmland. But What Is It Without Water?  By Somini Sengupta  How Severe Is the Western Drought? See For Yourself.  By Nadja Popovich  Droughts were really bad this year. We took a look at the conditions in California before fire season really took off, and in wine country specifically; in North Dakota; and in the whole American West over time.  The Pacific Coast had an off-the-charts heat wave, which caused hundreds of extra deaths and killed marine life en masse. Across the country, nights have gotten hotter.  By midsummer, fire season was in full force. Both the Bootleg and Dixie fires were so bad that they generated their own weather.  See How the Dixie Fire Created Its Own Weather  By Nadja Popovich, Noah Pisner, Nicholas Bartzokas, Evan Grothjan, Daniel Mangosing, Karthik Patanjali and Scott Reinhard  Meanwhile, other parts of the United States, and the world, were inundated with water. Record rain flooded subways and Hurricane Ida strengthened quickly into a monster, damaging fossil fuel infrastructure in the Gulf of Mexico and causing deaths from Louisiana to the Northeast.  These Maps Tell the Story of Two Americas: One Parched, One Soaked  By Aatish Bhatia and Nadja Popovich  A Battle Between a Great City and a Great Lake  By Dan Egan  After Hurricane Ida, Oil Infrastructure Springs Dozens of Leaks  By Blacki Migliozzi and Hiroko Tabuchi  In the oceans, climate change is leading to big shifts. The warming atmosphere is causing an arm of the powerful Gulf Stream to weaken, some scientists fear, which could have major climate ramifications from the Eastern United States to the Sahel in Africa. And in the Antarctic, wilder winds are altering currents, the sea is releasing carbon dioxide and ice is melting from below.  In the Atlantic Ocean, Subtle Shifts Hint at Dramatic Dangers  By Moises Velasquez-Manoff and Jeremy White  Rising From the Antarctic, a Climate Alarm  By Henry Fountain and Jeremy White  Here’s the Next Animal That Could Go Extinct  By Catrin Einhorn  Inequality  The effects of climate change are not equally felt. Nor is the blame equally shared. We reported on some of America’s biggest, and maybe most surprising, methane emitters. And we took a look at the countries with the most greenhouse gas emissions in history.  Who Has The Most Historical Responsibility for Climate Change?  By Nadja Popovich and Brad Plumer  We covered how disaster aid often favors white people. And how Native Americans, forced into the most undesirable areas of America by white settlers and the government, are now on land that’s becoming uninhabitable.  Dispossessed, Again: Climate Change Hits Native Americans Especially Hard  By Christopher Flavelle and Kalen Goodluck  Though the science of climate change is settled and we have the technology to address it, the biggest question now is: Who should pay the bill? This year, calls for climate aid and reparations reached a boiling point at the COP 26 climate conference in Glasgow.  The World Needs to Quit Oil and Gas. Africa Has an Idea: Rich Countries First  By Shola Lawal  Tiny Town, Big Decision: What Are We Willing to Pay to Fight the Rising Sea?  By Christopher Flavelle  We investigated how the E.P.A. approved toxic chemicals for fracking a decade ago. And investigated an unforeseen consequence of luxury auto sales:  How Americans’ Appetite for Leather in Luxury SUVs Worsens Amazon Deforestation  By Manuela Andreoni, Hiroko Tabuchi and Albert Sun  We explained why thieves nationwide are slithering under cars to steal catalytic converters. And how both Bitcoin and NFTs use up so much energy:  Bitcoin Uses More Electricity Than Many Countries. How Is That Possible?  By Jon Huang, Claire O’Neill and Hiroko Tabuchi  The Thorny Way Forward  A big report from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change in August summed things up.  A Hotter Future Is Certain, Climate Panel Warns. But How Hot Is Up to Us.  By Brad Plumer and Henry Fountain  Yes, There Has Been Progress on Climate. No, It’s Not Nearly Enough.  By Brad Plumer and Nadja Popovich  Knowledge about sustainable living has existed for centuries, and is often overlooked. Native people, often among the most effective stewards of nature, have often been disregarded, or worse.  There’s a Global Plan to Conserve Nature. Indigenous People Could Lead the Way.  By Somini Sengupta, Catrin Einhorn and Manuela Andreoni  We know that the way forward requires a transition to renewable energy, but the transition is not always straightforward.  Wyoming Coal Country Pivots, Reluctantly, to Wind Farms  By Dionne Searcey  There’s a Booming Business in America’s Forests. Some Aren’t Happy About It.  By Gabriel Popkin  Transportation is one of the most critical sectors to clean up. Some cities are setting an example for how to electrify public transit.  Electric cars will be key in reducing emissions, but when will they be here?  Whenever that is, they won’t be here without cobalt. And with more than two-thirds of the world’s cobalt production coming from the Democratic Republic of Congo, the country is taking center stage. The quest for Congo’s cobalt is caught in an international cycle of exploitation, greed and gamesmanship.  A Power Struggle Over Cobalt Rattles the Clean Energy Revolution  By Dionne Searcey, Michael Forsythe and Eric Lipton  We also took a look at some drawbacks of America’s highways — how they’ve divided many Black communities, increased car dependence and led to wildlife deaths — and some solutions to those problems.  Can Removing Highways Fix America’s Cities?  By Nadja Popovich, Josh Williams and Denise Lu  How Do Animals Safely Cross a Highway? Take a Look.  By Catrin Einhorn  And here’s how one Indiana city has experimented with roundabouts to reduce emissions and save lives:  These Americans Are Just Going Around in Circles. It Helps the Climate.  By Cara Buckley  We reported on how letting cows graze can increase carbon storage in the soil, on how more trees could reduce heat deaths, and on a possible fix for our broken recycling system:  Maine Will Make Companies Pay for Recycling. Here’s How It Works.  By Winston Choi-Schagrin  The Politics  Domestically, with a new administration, a big infrastructure bill and the perennial debate over how to address climate change, it was a busy year in politics.  While the Trump administration often dismissed science, the Biden administration attempted to restock the government with scientists, but it wasn’t easy:  Biden’s Climate Plans Are Stunted After Dejected Experts Fled Trump  By Coral Davenport, Lisa Friedman and Christopher Flavelle  Biden tightened pollution rules in a push to phase out gas cars, but worsening fires in California showed the limits of his power. Hitting climate targets will require a lot. Pretty much everything will need to change.  And change will require bipartisanship. As we reported this year, many Republicans in Congress no longer deny that Earth is heating because of fossil fuel emissions. In fact, some find the failure to grapple with climate change to be a “political liability” for the party. But they also say abandoning oil, gas and coal will harm the economy.  At the same time, Democrats can’t completely agree among themselves.  Key to Biden’s Climate Agenda Likely to Be Cut Because of Manchin Opposition  By Coral Davenport  As Manchin Blocks Climate Plan, His State Can’t Hold Back Floods  By Christopher Flavelle  Ultimately, even as paid family leave and other priorities were taken out of Biden’s plan, the largest piece of his spending bill became a $555 billion plan to fight climate change.  Internationally, two big conferences took place this year. One you may have heard of. Another, maybe not:  The Most Important Global Meeting You’ve Probably Never Heard Of  By Catrin Einhorn  Leading up to COP 26 in Glasgow, John Kerry, the first presidential envoy for climate, worked on his sales pitch to save the planet. And at the Glasgow conference, the U.S. and China came to an agreement, despite the challenges ahead for China:  China’s Power Crunch Exposes Tensions Ahead of Key U.N. Climate Summit  By Keith Bradsher and Lisa Friedman  After two weeks of lofty speeches and bitter negotiations among nearly 200 nations, the question of whether the world will make significant progress to slow global warming still comes down to the actions of a handful of powerful nations. And those nations remain at odds over how best to address climate change.  Climate Promises Made in Glasgow Now Rest With a Handful of Powerful Leaders  By Somini Sengupta  And Finally  Now that you’re caught up on the news, it’s never too late to freshen up your climate science knowledge — whether you’re a kid, or a kid at heart.  A Climate Change Guide for Kids  By Julia Rosen  The Science of Climate Change Explained: Facts, Evidence and Proof  By Julia Rosen 