

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
Business/Financial, Tuesday, February 23, 2021 1822 mots, p. B 1

The Climate Talk vs. the Walk

By Peter Eavis and Clifford Krauss

For   the   past   several   years,   BlackRock,   the   giant   investment   ﬁrm,   has   cast   itself   as   a   champion   of   the
transition to clean energy.

Last month, Laurence D. Fink, BlackRock's chief executive, wrote that the coronavirus pandemic had "driven
us   to   confront   the   global   threat   of   climate change   more   forcefully,"   and   the   company   said   it   wants
businesses it invests in to remove as much carbon dioxide from the environment as they emit by 2050 at the
latest.

But crucial details were missing from that widely read pledge, including what proportion of the companies
BlackRock invests in will be zero-emission businesses in 2050. Setting such a goal and earlier targets would
demonstrate the seriousness of the company's commitment and could force all sorts of industries to step up
their efforts. On Saturday, in response to questions from The New York Times, a BlackRock spokesman said
for the ﬁrst time that the company's "ambition" was to have "net zero emissions across our entire assets
under management by 2050."

As the biggest companies strive to trumpet their environmental activism, the need to match words with
deeds is becoming increasingly important.

Household names like Costco and Netﬂix have not provided emissions reduction targets despite saying they
want to reduce their impact on climate change. Others, like the agricultural giant Cargill and the clothing
company   Levi   Strauss,   have   made   commitments   but   have   struggled   to   cut   emissions.   Technology
companies like Google and Microsoft, which run power-hungry data centers, have slashed emissions, but
even they are ﬁnding that the technology often doesn't yet exist to carry out their "moonshot" objectives.

"You can look at a company's website and see their sustainability report and it will look great," said Alberto
Carrillo Pineda, a founder of Science Based Targets, a global initiative to assess corporate plans to reduce
emissions. "But then when you look at what is behind it, you'll see there is not a lot of substance behind
those commitments or the commitments are not comprehensive enough."

President Biden is also placing a big emphasis on climate change and has rejoined the Paris agreement. But
determining   how   hard   companies   are   really   trying   can   be   very   difﬁcult   when   there   are   no   regulatory
standards that require uniform disclosures of important information like emissions.

Institutional Shareholder Services, a ﬁrm that advises investors on how to vote on board elections and other
corporate matters, uses company data and its own analysis to assess what corporations are doing to reduce
emissions. Just over a third of the 500 companies in the S&amp;P 500 stock index have set ambitious targets,
it found, while 215 had no target at all. The rest had weak targets.

"To realize the necessary emission reductions, more ambitious targets urgently need to be set," said Viola
Lutz, deputy head of ISS ESG Climate Solutions, an arm of Institutional Shareholder Services. "Otherwise, we
project emissions for S&amp;P 500 companies will end up being triple of what they should be in 2050."

There has been some progress by companies that have rigorous targets. In a report last month, Science
Based   Targets,   which   was   started   by   the   environmental   groups   and   hundreds   of   businesses   brought
together by the United Nations, said the 338 large companies around the world for which it had sufﬁcient
emissions data collectively reduced their emissions by 25 percent between 2015 and 2019.

Often large companies in the same industry have very different records.

For example, Walmart discloses its targets for emissions reductions and the progress it has made to the
Carbon Disclosure Project, including a goal for emissions from its suppliers, and its plan has been vetted by
Science Based Targets. But Costco doesn't expect to have commitments to reduce emissions until the end of
next year. Costco executives declined to comment.

 





Netﬂix is often compared to technology giants like Google and Microsoft. But Netﬂix has yet to set a target
for reducing the emissions caused by its ofﬁces, production activities and the computer servers it uses.
"Climate action is important, and we'll announce our plans in the spring, which will include targets based on
climate science," the company said in a statement.


Slashing   emissions   is   difﬁcult.   Businesses   must   reliably   measure   how   much   carbon   dioxide   and   other
greenhouse gases they are responsible for. Then companies have to ﬁnd cleaner energy sources without
hurting their operations. Where they can't ﬁnd cleaner substitutes, businesses often pay others to reduce
emissions or remove carbon from the atmosphere.

The task gets even harder when companies begin the process of reducing so-called Scope 3 emissions --
pollution   caused   by   suppliers   and   customers.   At   oil   companies,   for   example,   Scope   3   would   include
emissions from cars that use gasoline.

BlackRock, with $8.7 trillion of assets under management, including stakes in many companies, clearly faces
a daunting task. The company doesn't directly own most of the shares or bonds it buys -- it manages them
for pension funds, other corporations and individual investors -- limiting how much climate activism it can
pursue. In addition, most of its investment products track indexes like the S&amp;P 500, so it inevitably ends
up managing stocks of fossil fuel companies.

Many Wall Street ﬁrms have made pledges to get to net zero emissions from their lending and other
ﬁnancial activities but have not made clear whether that goal applies to the stocks and bonds they manage
for customers. BlackRock's decision to include all the assets it manages could pressure other ﬁnancial giants
to make similar commitments, but it could rankle fossil fuel industries and their political supporters in
Congress.

Later this year, BlackRock is going to announce an interim target for how many of its investments will have
achieved, or be on their way to, zero emissions in 2030.

Still, BlackRock is careful about the language it uses when describing what it will do to push businesses in its
portfolios to reduce emissions -- for which it has been criticized by people who want the ﬁrm to take a more
activist   stand.   In   a   recent   letter,   the   company   said   it   was   intent   on   "increasing   the   role   of   votes   on
shareholder proposals in our stewardship efforts around sustainability."

"This could mean a lot of things and -- as always -- the proof is in the pudding," Ms. Lutz of ISS said.

Ed Sweeney, a company spokesman, said BlackRock had recently voted for a signiﬁcantly higher number of
shareholder proposals aimed at making companies greener compared with previous years. And in a client
memo sent Wednesday, the ﬁrm said it might vote against directors and management at companies that it
determines do not have clear climate disclosures and credible environmental plans.

"While we recognize that the transition to net zero is at different stages based on industry and region,
through   a   combination   of   engagement   with   management   teams   and   boards   of   directors   and   holding
companies accountable for insufﬁcient progress through our voting on director elections and shareholder
proposals, BlackRock will continue to focus on this important issue," Mr. Sweeney said in an email.

Other companies that have pledged to cut emissions face different challenges, including coordinating with
suppliers and partners.

Consider the apparel industry. Much of its contribution to climate change comes from its supply chain. The
clothes that Levi Strauss and others put their labels on are often made in factories in places like China,
Pakistan and India that remain reliant on coal-ﬁred power plants. The clothes are transported on ships and
planes that burn diesel and jet fuel.

Even so, when Levi Strauss rolled out its 2025 climate action strategy three years ago, its chief executive, Chip
Bergh, said, "We believe it's time for businesses to start playing a larger role in ﬁghting the world's most
pressing problems, like climate change."

The company set a Scope 3 emissions target. But Science Based Targets said in January that emissions from
Levi's supply chain were not falling and had grown by 13 percent between 2016 and 2019.

Jeffrey Hogue, Levi Strauss's chief sustainability ofﬁcer, said that calculation was incomplete because the
company could not yet take credit for many interventions and investments it has made with suppliers. He
said   that   would   happen   once   the   apparel   industry   decides   on   a   method   for   calculating   the   advances

 





suppliers have made in cutting emissions, particularly for factories that sell to multiple companies.


"We believe we are way better than 13 percent," Mr. Hogue said. But he said he could not conﬁdently give his
own estimate, adding, "We are working with the industry to create more accuracy and precision in the
number."

Gary Cook, the global climate campaigns director of Stand.earth, an environmental group, was skeptical.
"They set an aggressive target and they are struggling with that," he said.

Cargill, one of the largest privately owned American companies and a major middleman that works with
farmers and food companies around the world, has attempted to become a strong voice on climate change
but has struggled to meet its goals.

The company is a big purchaser of Brazilian soybeans, which are often grown on land that was previously
forested. In 2010, Cargill promised to meet a "net zero" deforestation goal by 2020, but the company did not
succeed and has extended its target to 2030. "Our commitment on deforestation has not wavered," said Jill
Kolling, Cargill's vice president for global sustainability.

The company's plans show how emissions could go up over all even when a business has set a goal to cut
them. Cargill wants to reduce its emissions in its global supply chains by 30 percent per ton of production by
2030, a target it made no progress on at the time of measurement in 2019, according to Science Based
Targets. But overall emissions in its supply chains may not fall by that amount because of increases in
production. "It depends on how our business grows, and that's hard to predict," Ms. Kolling said.

By contrast, deep-pocketed tech ﬁrms have probably made the most progress. Now they are setting even
more ambitious targets.

Google wants all its operations to be consistently powered by renewable energy by 2030, but that could be
difﬁcult to achieve because the output of wind and solar farms is still small in some countries. Microsoft
wants to be "carbon negative" by 2030 even including Scope 3 emissions. That goal will almost certainly
require extracting carbon dioxide from the atmosphere. Those technologies are nascent and could be very
expensive.

And for all these ambitious targets, even some executives argue that the current voluntary approach won't
ensure the required reduction in emissions.

"If we are going to achieve a net-zero carbon economy for real, we will need everyone to act," said Lucas
Joppa,   Microsoft's   chief   environmental   ofﬁcer.   "And   that   means   action   can't   be   voluntary.   We   need
requirements and standards that everyone is expected to meet."



