

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
National, Saturday, April 3, 2021 855 mots, p. A 3

CLIMATE FWD:

Here to Help; How to Get Involved In Environmental Issues

President Biden is planning a huge economic program that would represent a fundamental shift in the way
Democrats treat the environment: Climate change would not be a side issue.

Our   virtual   event   series,   Netting   Zero,   returns   on   Thursday.   Moderated   by   the   Times   journalist   Henry
Fountain, this episode will explore climate solutions linked to the world's oceans. You can sign up here.

President Biden's economic team is ﬁnalizing plans to invest between $3 trillion and $4 trillion in spending
and tax credits to lift the economy, but one thing is already certain: Tackling climate change and shifting to
clean energy will underpin virtually every part of the package.

The move represents a major philosophical shift in how Democrats talk about solving global warming.
They're not treating it like a side element of broader economic stimulus efforts, as in the Obama era. This
time, ﬁxing climate change is at the heart of the economic plan.

Why it matters: Democrats have struggled to make the case for reducing planet-warming greenhouse gases.
The new spending plans show they are coalescing around a clear message, that solving climate change goes
hand-in-hand with lifting the economy.

The numbers: Climate-related spending in the economic plan could reach $2 trillion, one source said.

Biden appointees at the E.P.A. said they were shocked by the extent of political meddling in scientiﬁc
decisions under the Trump administration. They're carrying out a public accounting.

The Senate leader stalls an insurance overhaul

The ofﬁce of Chuck Schumer, the Senate majority leader, has put the brakes on a plan by the Federal
Emergency Management Agency to update ﬂood insurance rates by making them more accurately reﬂect
the risks faced by individual policyholders.

The new rates were supposed to start going into effect on Oct. 1. Now with Mr. Schumer objecting that the
overhaul will hurt some of his New York constituents, it's unclear whether that will still happen.

The dust-up demonstrates a big problem for elected ofﬁcials: Measures to address the risks that come with
rising seas can be very unpopular among constituents with waterfront property. -- Christopher Flavelle and
Emily Cochrane

Key numbers: For 23 percent of households with ﬂood insurance, costs would go down under the FEMA plan.
Another 73 percent would see no change, or an increase of no more than $20 a month. But some high-risk
households would eventually see their rates go up ﬁvefold or more.

Why   it   matters:   Flood   insurance   premiums   are   among   the   government's   most   powerful   tools   for
discouraging construction in high-risk areas.

After a season of ﬁre, ﬂoods ravage Australia

Two huge storms have converged over eastern Australia over the past week, dumping more than three feet
of rain in just ﬁve days. The ﬂooding comes less than a year after the country suffered the worst wildﬁres in
its recorded history.

Scientists say that both forms of catastrophe represent Australia's new normal. The country is one of many
seeing a pattern of intensiﬁcation -- more extreme hot days and heat waves, as well as more extreme rainfalls
over short periods. -- Damien Cave

Video: The ﬂoods necessitated at least 500 rescues in New South Wales and Queensland.



 



Also important this week:


Fish farming is getting better: Fish raised in captivity are eating more veggies and less wild ﬁsh, a new study
has found. That's good news for nature.

The seas are still vulnerable: Bottom trawling may unleash as much carbon as air travel, according to new
research on marine conservation.

And ﬁnally, one thing you can do:

Stay informed about local issues

The Keystone XL pipeline might not run through your backyard, but there are probably other important
environmental issues up for debate in your community. The problem? It can be hard to ﬁnd out about them.

Most state environmental agencies have a newsletter or bulletin because they're required to notify residents
about speciﬁc actions. Unfortunately, those bulletins can be pretty boring, long and confusing.

It might be more effective to join a local environmental advocacy organization, said Kimberly Ong, a lawyer
with the Natural Resources Defense Council, though not necessarily a big national one. Plus, states and
municipalities have different rules, which can be hard to navigate by yourself.

There are a few reasons you, as a local, have more power this way: You're the expert on your area, your health
might be affected, and you have a say in whether the politicians or ofﬁcials responsible keep their jobs, she
said.

These groups have experts who are paying close attention to legislation and regulatory changes and can
distill this information to help you ﬁgure out how best to leverage your power. Speaking with one voice
makes a big difference, Ms. Ong said.

"It's always good to have a buddy, but it's especially good to have a buddy in environmental advocacy," she
said. -- Tatiana Schlossberg




