

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
Science, Tuesday, February 2, 2021 1140 mots, p. D 7

PERSONAL HEALTH

How Climate Change Affects Your Health

By Jane E. Brody

No matter where you live or how high your socioeconomic status, climate change can endanger your health,
both physical and mental, now and in the future.

Melting ice caps, warmer oceans, intense storms, heat waves, droughts, ﬂoods and wildﬁres -- all these well-
documented effects of climate change may seem too remote to many people to prompt them to adopt
behaviors that can slow the warming of the planet. Unless your neighborhood was destroyed by a severe
hurricane or raging wildﬁre, you might think such disasters happen only to other people.

But what if I told you that no matter where you live or how high your socioeconomic status, climate change
can endanger your health, both physical and mental, now and in the future? Not only your health, but also
the health of your children and grandchildren? Might you consider making changes to help mitigate the
threat?

Relatively few Americans associate climate change with possible harms to their health, and most have given
little thought to this possibility. Even though I read widely about medical issues, like most Americans, I too
was unaware of how many health hazards can accompany climate change.

Studies in the United States and Britain have shown that "people have a strong tendency to see climate
change   as   less   threatening   to   their   health   and   to   their   family's   health   than   to   other   people's   health,"
according to Julia Hathaway and Edward W. Maibach at the Center for Climate Change Communication at
George Mason University.

Two recently published reports set me straight. One, by two public health experts, called for the creation
within the National Institutes of Health of a "National Institute of Climate Change and Health" to better
inform the medical community, public ofﬁcials and ordinary citizens about ways to stanch looming threats to
human health from further increases in global warming.

The experts, Dr. Howard Frumkin and Dr. Richard J. Jackson, both former directors of the National Center for
Environmental Health at the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, warned that recent climate-related
disasters, including devastating wildﬁres and a record-breaking hurricane season, demonstrate that our
failure to take climate change seriously is resulting in needless suffering and death.

The second report appeared just as I began investigating the evidence supporting their proposal: a full-page
article in The New York Times   on   Nov.   29   with   the   headline   "Wildﬁre   Smoke   in   California   Is   Poisoning
Children." It described lung damage along with lifelong threats to the health of youngsters forced to breathe
smoke-laden air from wildﬁres that began raging in August and fouled the air throughout the fall.

Children are not the only ones endangered. Anyone with asthma can experience life-threatening attacks
when pollution levels soar. The risks of heart disease and stroke rise. And a recent study in JAMA Neurology of
more than 18,000 Americans with cognitive impairment found a strong link between high levels of air
pollution and an increased risk of developing dementia.

"While   anyone's   health   can   be   harmed   by   climate change,   some   people   are   at   greatly   increased   risk,
including   young   children,   pregnant   women,   older   adults,   people   with   chronic   illnesses   and   disabilities,
outdoor   workers,   and   people   with   fewer   resources,"   Drs.   Hathaway   and   Maibach   wrote   in   Current
Environmental Health Reports.

Alas, said Dr. Jackson, emeritus professor at the University of California, Los Angeles, "Human beings respond
only to what is a threat to them at the moment. Californians are now much more aware -- the ﬁres got
people's attention." The wildﬁre season is now starting much earlier and ending later as a result of a warming
climate, an international research team reported in The New England Journal of Medicine in November.

 





Dr. Frumkin, emeritus professor at the University of Washington, told me, "Lots of people who don't consider
climate change a major problem relative to themselves do take it seriously when they realize it's a health
concern. Heat waves, for example, not only kill people, they also diminish work capacity, sleep quality and
academic performance in children."


"Our changing climate will have much more of an impact on people's health over time," Dr. Jackson said.
People of all ages will develop respiratory allergies, and those who already have allergies can expect them to
get worse, as plants and trees respond to a warmer climate and release their allergens in more places and for
longer periods.

Infectious diseases carried by ticks, mosquitoes and other vectors also rise with a warming climate. Even
small increases in temperature in temperate zones raise the potential for epidemics of Lyme disease, Rocky
Mountain spotted fever, encephalitis and other tick-borne infections, as well as mosquito-borne West Nile
disease, dengue fever and even malaria.

Climate change endangers the safety of foods and water supplies by fostering organisms that cause food
poisoning   and   microbial   contamination   of   drinking   water.   Extreme   ﬂooding   and   hurricanes   can   spawn
epidemics of leptospirosis; just walking through ﬂoodwaters can increase the risk of this bacterial blood
infection 15-fold.

These are just a smattering of the health risks linked to global warming. They are extensive and require both
societal and individual efforts to minimize. Yes, society is changing, albeit slowly. The Biden administration
has rejoined the Paris Climate Agreement. General Motors, the nation's largest car manufacturer, announced
it would dedicate itself to electric vehicles and other green energy initiatives, and Ford, Volkswagen   and
others are doing the same.

Lest you feel you can't make a difference, let me suggest some steps many of us can take to help assure a
healthier future for everyone.

I assume you've already changed your light bulbs to more efﬁcient LEDs. But have you checked the source of
your electricity to see that it relies primarily on nonpolluting renewable energy sources? Can you install solar
panels where you live? If you can afford to, replace old energy-guzzling appliances with new efﬁcient ones.
And don't waste electricity or water.

Now tackle transportation. Drive less and use people power more. Wherever possible, commute and run
errands   by   cycling,   walking   or   scootering,   which   can   also   directly   enhance   your   health.   Or   take   public
transportation. If you must drive, consider getting an electric car, which can save fuel costs as well as protect
the environment.

How about a dietary inventory, one that can enhance your health both directly and indirectly? Cutting back
on or cutting out red meat to reduce greenhouse gases, relying instead on plant-based foods, is the perfect
start to a healthier planet and its human inhabitants.

Reduce waste. Currently, Dr. Jackson said, 30 percent of our food is wasted. Buy only what you need and use
it before it spoils. Support organizations like City Harvest, which distributes unsold food from stores and
unused food from restaurants to those in need.

Reuse or recycle materials instead of throwing out everything you no longer want nor need.

