

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
National, Wednesday, February 10, 2021 428 mots, p. A 21

Climate Change Is Lengthening Pollen Season in U.S., Study
Shows

By John Schwartz

New research suggests that climate change is responsible for longer pollen seasons in the United States and
more pollen in the air, as well.

Among the many disasters climate change is wreaking around the world, scientists have now identiﬁed a
more personal one: It's making allergy season worse.

That   is   the   message   of   a   new   study   in   the   journal   Proceedings   of   the   National   Academy   of   Sciences
published on Monday. The researchers found a strong link between planetary warming and pollen seasons
that will make many of us dread spring just a little bit more.

According to the new paper, the combination of warming air and higher levels of carbon dioxide in the
atmosphere has caused North American pollen seasons since 1990 to start some 20 days earlier, on average,
and to have 21 percent more pollen.

Scientists have suggested for some time that the season is getting longer and more awful, and the new
research provides greater detail and estimates of just how much a warming planet is responsible for the
greater misery. They concluded that climate change caused about half of the trend in the pollen season, and
8 percent of the higher pollen count. What's more, the trend of higher pollen counts, the researchers said, is
accelerating.

The most pronounced effects were seen in Texas, the Midwest and the Southeast, said William Anderegg, an
assistant professor of biology at the University of Utah and the lead author of the new study. The effects were
less obvious in the northern United States, including New England and the Great Lakes states. The greatest
pollen increases came from trees, as opposed to grasses and weeds, he said.

The   researchers   employed   the   techniques   of   attribution   science,   which   is   commonly   used   to   state   the
degree to which extreme weather events like heat waves, wildﬁres or the amount of rain a hurricane brings
are worse than they would have been in a world without climate change.

Applying this branch of science to pollen was a novel and welcome idea, said Kristie Ebi, a professor in the
Center for Health and the Global Environment at the University of Washington who was not involved in the
study. "It's a great piece of work," she said. "There has been very little research on the application of detection
and attribution analysis to the health risks of a changing climate."

