

The New York Times (web site)
Thursday, February 4, 2021 -  602 mots

Film Club: ‘Rebuild or Leave “Paradise”: Climate Change
Dilemma Facing a Nicaraguan Coastal Town’

By The Learning Network

2020 tied for the hottest year on record for the planet. It was a record-setting Atlantic hurricane season too.
Which communities are most threatened by climate change?

Students in U.S. high schools can get free digital access to The New York Times until Sept. 1, 2021.

“Rebuild or Leave ‘Paradise’: Climate Change Dilemma Facing a Nicaraguan Coastal Town” is a six-minute
ﬁlm that touches on themes of environment, loss and home. It tells the story of the Miskito village of
Haulover that was hit by two major hurricanes in November. Faced with a future of intensifying storms, the
residents must now consider whether to abandon their way of life by the ocean and move inland.

“Climate change affects everyone, but it doesn’t hit us all equally,” says Marcos Williamson, an ecologist
featured in the ﬁlm. Who are the communities and people most impacted by climate change? What can we
learn from the world’s most vulnerable during the climate crisis?

Students

1. Watch the short ﬁlm above. While you watch, you might take notes using our Film Club Double-Entry
Journal (PDF) to help you remember speciﬁc moments.

2. After watching, think about these questions:

What moments in this ﬁlm stood out for you? Why?

Were there any surprises? Anything that challenged what you know — or thought you knew?

What messages, emotions or ideas will you take away from this ﬁlm? Why?

What questions do you still have?What connections can you make between this ﬁlm and your own life or
experience? Why? Does this ﬁlm remind you of anything else you’ve read or seen? If so, how and why?

3.   An   additional   challenge   |   Respond   to   the   essential   question   at   the   top   of   this   post:   Who   are   the
communities and the people most endangered by climate change?

4. Next, join the conversation by clicking on the comment button and posting in the box that opens on the
right. (Students 13 and older are invited to comment, although teachers of younger students are welcome to
post what their students have to say.)

5. After you have posted, try reading back to see what others have said, then respond to someone else by
posting another comment. Use the “Reply” button or the @ symbol to address that student directly.

6. To learn more, read “After Hurricane’s Devastation, a Dilemma in Nicaragua: Rebuild or Relocate?” Brent
McDonald and Alfonso Flores Bermúdez write:

HAULOVER, Nicaragua — When the leaders of an Indigenous Miskito village returned to their homes days
after Hurricane Iota struck last November, they found their lush community in Nicaragua’s northeast laid to
ruin — and the coastline itself transformed.

Their colorful, postcard-perfect wooden homes had been cut down, and the coconut-tree-lined beaches
devastated. The surrounding mangrove forests that supplied protection and nourishment to the village,
known as Haulover, were battered and broken. Drinking wells were contaminated with saltwater.

And a wedge of ocean the width of a football ﬁeld now cut through the middle of town, leaving villagers with
an anguishing question: Stay and rebuild, or resettle inland?



 



“I   never   imagined   arriving   in   the   community   and   not   ﬁnding   any   points   of   reference,”   said   Marcos
Williamson,   an   ecologist   at   the   Regional   Autonomous   University   in   Puerto   Cabezas   who   is   leading   an
environmental assessment. “It was like a bomb went off that practically disappeared the community.”




