

The New York Times (web site)
Wednesday, March 24, 2021 -  466 mots

Senate Democrats plan to employ an obscure legislative
tool to reinstate an Obama-era climate change rule.

By Coral Davenport

Democrats hope to wipe out some of the executive-branch policies enacted in the last days of the Trump
administration.

Senate Democrats plan to deploy an obscure but powerful legislative weapon in the coming weeks to try to
quickly reinstate a major Obama-era climate change rule that the Trump administration had effectively
eliminated.

Senator Chuck Schumer of New York, the Democratic leader, is expected next month to invoke the 1996
Congressional Review Act with the goal of undoing a Trump rule ﬁnalized in September that lifted controls
on the release of methane, a powerful planet-warming gas that is emitted from leaks and ﬂares in oil and gas
wells.

Democrats argue that the move, which will be sponsored by Senator Martin Heinrich of New Mexico, will
have the legal effect of immediately reinstating the Obama methane rules. That would be a far more rapid
timetable than the years-long regulatory process typically required to undo or reinstate regulations.

“The   Trump   rule   to   remove   limits   on   emissions   of   methane   from   oil   and   gas   was   an   illogical   and   a
devastating blow to one of the most important tools to curbing greenhouse gas emissions,” Mr. Schumer
said in a statement. “The Democratic Senate will hold a vote to overturn this rule, which is one of many
initiatives we are pursuing to ﬁght the climate crisis.”

Under the Congressional Review Act, any regulation ﬁnalized within 60 legislative days of the end of a
presidential term can be overturned with a simple majority vote in the Senate.

Before 2017, the review act procedure had been used only once, to undo a Clinton-era rule on workplace
ergonomics in 2001. Then, in the early months of the Trump administration, Senate Republicans used the
procedure to wipe out 14 Obama-era regulations in 16 weeks. Democrats now intend to employ it to wipe out
some of the executive-branch policies enacted in the last days of the Trump administration.

The most signiﬁcant of those would be the rules on methane, which were published by the Environmental
Protection   Agency.   While   most   climate change   regulations   target   carbon   dioxide,   the   most   damaging
greenhouse gas, methane is a close second, lingering in the atmosphere for a shorter period of time but
packing a bigger punch while it lasts. By some estimates, methane has 80 times the heat-trapping power of
carbon dioxide in the ﬁrst 20 years in the atmosphere.

For Democrats to repeal the methane rule, they will most likely need all 50 votes of their party’s razor-thin
majority — including that of Senator Joe Manchin III of West Virginia, who often votes with Republicans on
matters of environmental policy. However, in 2017, Mr. Manchin voted with his party to retain a different
regulation on methane pollution.

