

The New York Times (web site)
Monday, March 15, 2021 -  866 mots

New E.P.A. Head Says Agency Has Climate Regulations
Underway

By Lisa Friedman

Michael Regan says the E.P.A. is already working on new rules to control planet-warming emissions from
cars and power plants.

WASHINGTON   —   Michael   S.   Regan,   the   new   administrator   of   the   Environmental   Protection   Agency,
conﬁrmed on Monday that the agency is preparing new regulations on the electricity sector in an effort to
meet President Biden’s aggressive climate change goals.

Mr. Regan said his immediate priorities for the E.P.A. are “rebuilding the morale” at the agency, restoring the
role of science — and scientists — in developing air and water rules, and ensuring new environmental
policies do not further hurt communities already disproportionately affected by toxic sites.

He was not speciﬁc on the precise new policies E.P.A. will undertake to rein in planet-warming carbon
dioxide emissions, or when they will be made public. But, Mr. Regan said, the agency will “absolutely”
develop new rules for power plants and automobiles and that E.P.A. staff is currently working on those plans.

“We’ll be hearing from staff very soon about the particulars,” Mr. Regan said.

Reducing   carbon   emissions   from   power   plants   and   vehicles,   which   are   the   largest   sources   of   planet-
warming pollution in the United States, is critical to meeting Mr. Biden’s goal of no net carbon emissions by
2050.

Unless   Congress   passes   legislation   —   an   unlikely   scenario   —   it   will   be   up   to   the   E.P.A.   to   create   new
regulations for both sectors. The Obama administration sought to reshape the electric power sector by
pushing utilities away from coal and toward electricity generated by natural gas, solar, wind and other lower
or no-carbon sources. That rule, the Clean Power Plan, was halted by the Supreme Court.

But the Trump administration’s efforts ran into trouble as well. The Clean Power Plan replacement — a far
weaker rule that only asked utilities to make modest efﬁciency modiﬁcations at individual power plants —
was struck down entirely by a federal court earlier this year.

That decision, by the U.S. Court of Appeals for the District of Columbia, afﬁrmed that the E.P.A. has the
authority to regulate carbon dioxide from the power sector. Mr. Regan said he intends to take advantage of
that.

“We’re starting with a clean slate but we’re not starting from scratch,” he said. In addition, Mr. Regan noted,
market forces have changed. Coal-burning power plants already are retiring at a rapid pace, and according to
the International Energy Agency, renewables could surpass coal as the world’s largest source of power by
2025.

“We’re not looking backward; we’re looking forward, and I’m really excited about that,” he said.

Republicans from fossil fuel states have indicated they are ready to ﬁght any broad regulations that target
coal. Senator Shelley Moore Capito of West Virginia, who opposed Mr. Regan’s conﬁrmation, said she did so
because “he did not commit to a different policy agenda than that of the Obama administration” — which,
she said, “absolutely devastated my state and other energy-producing states.”

The agency is under time pressure. President Biden has scheduled a global climate change summit for April
22, where the United States will announce a new national emissions target. Foreign leaders also will be
expecting the administration to prove to the world how it plans to meet the goals it lays out.

Mr. Regan said it was too soon to promise there will be proposed regulations released by the time of the
summit. But, he said, “I do believe that we will have the scientiﬁc credibility to support the direction the
president wants to go.”

 





For now, Mr. Regan said, he is focused on staff morale that suffered under a Trump administration that often
ignored   career   scientists   and   scientiﬁc   ﬁndings.   He   pointed   speciﬁcally   to   the   Trump   administration’s
approach   to   climate change   as   well   as   per-   and   polyﬂuoroalkyl   substances,   or   PFAS,   a   toxic   family   of
substances found in common household products.


“Morale is not where we want it to be, not nearly where we want it to be. We’re going to spend some time
there,” he said.

He also said he intends to appoint an environmental justice adviser to revamp the agency’s approach to civil
rights and help develop deeper relationships with communities that most closely experience the burdens of
pollution and impacts of climate change. “That’s going to be a signiﬁcant priority,” he said.

Mr. Regan had kind words for his immediate predecessor, Andrew Wheeler, and said that Mr. Wheeler left “a
very kind letter” on his desk in the administrator’s ofﬁce.

Mr. Regan, who was sworn in on Friday, said he’s still learning his way around the building. One place he said
he’s not likely to have much use for, though, is the soundproof phone booth that Scott Pruitt, President
Donald J. Trump’s ﬁrst E.P.A. administrator, had installed at a taxpayer cost of $43,000.

“I don’t even know where it is or what it looks like. I guess the ﬁrst thing I should do is take a look at it,” Mr.
Regan said, adding, “I’ve been using the phone on my desk.”

 


