

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
Foreign, Friday, March 26, 2021 931 mots, p. A 11

Canada Court Gives Victory On Climate To Trudeau

By Ian Austen

In rejecting a request from some provinces to strike down national carbon pricing, the court declared that
the measure meets an important national need.

OTTAWA  --  In   a   decision   that  marked   an  important  victory  for   Prime  Minister   Justin  Trudeau's  climate
change agenda, Canada's Supreme Court ruled that the federal government's imposition of carbon taxes in
provinces that oppose them was constitutional.

Citing Parliament's power to legislate on matters related to "peace, order and good government," the court
said that ﬁghting climate change by reducing greenhouse gas emissions was a matter of "national concern"
protected under the Constitution.

"This matter is critical to our response to an existential threat to human life in Canada and around the world,"
the court wrote in its 6-to-3 decision. "Climate change is real. It is caused by greenhouse gas emissions
resulting from human activities and it poses a grave threat to humanity's future."

The concept of carbon pricing has been widely endorsed by economists and, according to the World Bank,
some form of it has been carried out or is in development in 64 countries, either through direct taxes on fossil
fuels or through cap-and-trade programs.

Setting minimum carbon prices as a way to reduce emissions and encourage efﬁciency is a cornerstone of
Mr. Trudeau's climate change program. During the 2015 election campaign that ﬁrst brought him to power,
Mr. Trudeau emphasized the need for provinces to implement carbon pricing, an approach opposed by his
Conservative predecessor, Stephen Harper.

Several   U.S.   states   have   carbon   pricing   programs,   notably   California.   Money   and   tax   credits   to   address
climate change are expected to underpin much of President Biden's coming spending proposals, which
aides and documents suggest could cost as much as $4 trillion over the next decade.

But several people familiar with the forthcoming infrastructure package in the United States said that there
are no plans currently to price carbon emissions. Instead, the president plans to greatly raise fuel efﬁciency
standards for cars, forcing automakers toward electric vehicles through regulation, not legislation. Similarly,
Mr. Biden plans to reimpose strict emissions regulations on electric power plants to move the sector away
from coal.

Republicans in Congress remain ﬁrmly opposed to a carbon tax and have voted repeatedly and nearly
unanimously over the years to bar the government from imposing one.

Like Republicans in the United States, conservative premiers in the oil-producing provinces of Alberta and
Saskatchewan have long strenuously campaigned against carbon pricing. They were joined by Doug Ford,
another Conservative, who canceled the carbon pricing program in Ontario shortly after he became premier
of Canada's most populous province in 2018.

Court challenges by those three provinces of Mr. Trudeau's carbon pricing law ultimately led to the Supreme
Court's decision.

"We certainly would hope that this brings an end to the jurisdictional and partisan battle around climate
action here in Canada," said Keith Brooks, programs director at Environmental Defence, an advocacy group.
"People, including premiers who don't like carbon pricing, use it as a political wedge and to sow division but
also misinformation."

While the Supreme Court decision's detailed the dangers of climate changes to Canada and its coastlines,
Arctic   region   and   Indigenous   people   in   particular,   none   of   the   three   provinces   that   started   the   legal
challenges dispute its effects. Their objections instead focused on the argument that Mr. Trudeau's program

 





had overstepped the federal government's constitutional powers.


In 2019, Mr. Trudeau set a minimum price for carbon. It will become 40 Canadian dollars a metric ton on April
1 and will reach 170 dollars a ton in 2030. Most provinces have their own programs to meet those targets,
either through a direct charge on fuels and industry emissions or by setting a cap on emissions and then
creating a marketplace for industries that exceed the limit to buy emission permits from other businesses
who fall below the cap.

The federal government has only stepped in when a province, like Ontario under Mr. Ford, refused to price
carbon. In those cases, it placed a tax on fuel and set other fees for industrial emissions.

Individual Canadians receive carbon tax rebates from the government to compensate for the surcharge on
fuel. A review by Parliament's budget watchdog found that most households are paid more in rebates than
they spend on carbon taxes. Households can boost that bonus by further cutting emissions by using more
efﬁcient or electric vehicles or improving their heating systems.

Jason Kenney, the premier of Alberta, who canceled his province's program, told reporters that he was
disappointed with the decision but declined to say if his province will come up with a carbon pricing system
to replace the federally imposed one. "We're going to consult with Albertans and talk to our allied provinces
to determine the best way forward," he said.

The Supreme Court upheld the constitutionality of the law in part because the federal plan only kicks in if
provinces   do   not   set   up   their   programs,   thus   maintaining   the   shared   jurisdiction   the   two   levels   of
government hold on environmental issues.

It   also   concluded   that   setting   a   single   national   minimum   price   for   carbon   is   necessary   for   effectively
reducing greenhouse gases, or GHGs, which makes federal involvement essential

"Addressing climate change requires collective national and international action," the court wrote. "This is
because the harmful effects of GHGs are, by their very nature, not conﬁned by borders."

Lisa Friedman contributed reporting from Washington, D.C.




