

The New York Times (web site)
Monday, March 8, 2021 -  862 mots

Global Warming’s Deadly Combination: Heat and Humidity

By Henry Fountain

A   new   study   suggests   that   large   swaths   of   the   tropics   will   experience   dangerous   living   and   working
conditions if global warming isn’t limited to 1.5 degrees Celsius.

Here’s   one   more   reason   the   world   should   aim   to   limit   warming   to   1.5   degrees   Celsius,   a   goal   of   the
international Paris Agreement: It will help keep the tropics from becoming a deadly hothouse.

A study published Monday suggests that sharply cutting emissions of greenhouse gases to stay below that
limit, which is equivalent to about 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit of warming since 1900, will help the tropics avoid
episodes of high heat and high humidity — known as extreme wet-bulb temperature, or TW — that go
beyond the limits of human survival.

“An important problem of climate research is what a global warming target means for local extreme weather
events,” said Yi Zhang, a graduate student in geosciences at Princeton University and the study’s lead author.
“This work addresses such a problem for extreme TW.”

The study is in line with other recent research showing that high heat and humidity are potentially one of the
deadliest consequences of global warming.

“We know that climate change is making extreme heat and humidity more common,” said Robert Kopp, a
climate scientist at Rutgers University who was not involved in the study. “And both of those things reduce
our ability to live in a given climate.”

Dr. Kopp, who was an author of a study published last year that found that exposure to heat and humidity
extremes was increasing worldwide, said a key contribution of the new work was in showing that, for the
tropics, “it is easier to predict the combined effects of heat and humidity than just how hot it is.”

Ms. Zhang, along with two other Princeton researchers, Isaac Held and Stephan Fueglistaler, looked at how
the combination of high heat and high humidity is controlled by dynamic processes in the atmosphere. They
found that if global warming is limited to 1.5 degrees, the wet-bulb temperature at the surface can approach
but not exceed 35 degrees Celsius, or 95 degrees Fahrenheit, in the tropics.

That region, a band roughly 3,000 miles from north to south that encircles Earth at the Equator, includes
much of South and East Asia, Central America, Central Africa. It is home to more than 3 billion people.

Above a wet-bulb temperature of 35 Celsius, the body cannot cool down, as sweat on the skin can no longer
evaporate. Prolonged exposure to such conditions can be fatal, even for healthy people. Lower but still high
wet-bulb temperatures can affect health and productivity in other ways.

Ms. Zhang cautioned that the effect on health from her study was uncertain, since she and her colleagues
looked only at how high wet-bulb temperatures would get, not how often the extremes would be reached or
how long they would last. “Thorough knowledge on the health impact of intensity, frequency, and duration
of high wet-bulb temperatures is needed,” she said.

The study was published in the journal Nature Geosciences.

The target of 1.5 degrees of warming was the lower of two established by the 2015 Paris Agreement among
nations to ﬁght climate change. But the world has already warmed by about 1 degree since 1900, and the
ability to stay beneath the target is slowly slipping away as nations’ emissions reductions, both achieved and
pledged, have fallen far short of what is needed.

A growing body of research has found that global warming so far is taking an increasing toll on human
health indirectly through drought and crop failures, extreme storms and ﬂooding, increased spread of certain
insect-borne diseases and other effects.



 



But heat also has direct effects on the human body. Even relatively dry heat can be enough to kill people, as
evidenced by the toll from heat waves in recent years. And the combination of heat and high humidity has
already reached dangerous levels in parts of the world.


A study last year that looked at weather data found two sites in the tropics that have already had numerous
occurrences   of   wet-bulb   temperatures   above   35   degrees,   and   many   sites,   including   some   along   the
southeastern coast of the United States, that have had TW readings from 31 to 33 degrees. But in most of the
occurrences, the extreme conditions lasted only for an hour or two.

The effects of heat and humidity are worse for women, older people and those with chronic conditions like
diabetes and hypertension, said Glen Kenny, a professor of physiology at the University of Ottawa who
studies how the body copes with heat stress.

Work or exercise generates heat, and the body has to dissipate it. If the air temperature is higher than body
temperature, the main source of cooling is through evaporation of sweat. But if the humidity reaches a point
where sweat cannot evaporate, “essentially the body will gain heat,” said Dr. Kenny, who was not involved in
the new study.

That stresses the cardiovascular system. “The strain that the heart is facing becomes progressively greater,
especially if there’s successive days of heat exposure,” he said.



 


