 Tuesday, September 1, 2020 The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) • p. 3 • 358 words Climate and BLM move up news agenda for six-year-olds By Craig Simpson NEWSROUND will expand its coverage of environmen- tal issues and Black Lives Matter to reflect children's concerns, the BBC has announced. The current affairs programme, aimed at children aged be- tween six and 12, is expanding its bul- letins and moving to reach a wider audi- ence on You-Tube. Special programmes commissioned for the new-look Newsround will feature shows focussed on the lives of black children growing up in the UK and at the issue of periods, as editors seek to provide coverage of "things that kids are passionate about". This coverage will be helped by a new environment correspondent recruited by Newsround in the wake of increased concern about climate change prompted by Greta Thunberg, the 17-year-old Swedish activist. A new eight-minute CBBC bulletin every morning will cover these issues of interest to children. in the environment and politics. News- round's role is to reflect issues kids care about and reflect their lives. "You can also see this passion in the comments section of the Newsround website where children will share their views on the topics Newsround covers." Newsround bulletins will air every morning on iPlayer, as well as on CB- BC, and reflect concerns including Black Lives Matter activity and environ- mentalism. New specials will include Growing Up Black in the UK, following three chil- dren who discuss their experiences and craft a manifesto for change. Another commission, Why Don't we talk about Periods?, will look at the issues around period poverty and educate on menstru- ation. Mr Plunkett added: "Our Newsround team are passionate about reporting age- appropriate news stories across all our platforms that speak to the lives of to- day's children. © 2020 The Daily Telegraph (London, UK). All rights reserved. Le présent document est protégé par les lois et conventions internationales sur le droit d'au- teur et son utilisation est régie par ces lois et conven- tions. Certificat émis le 18 novembre 2020 à ENS-CACHAN à des fins de visualisation personnelle et temporaire. Editors are also promising increased on- line content, and they will provide a greater reach through a new YouTube platform. "These changes reflect the changing me- dia habits of our audience and ensure Newsround will for generations to come." remain relevant Paul Plunkett, the editor of Newsround, said: "You only have to see the protests for climate change led by Greta Thun- berg to see the interest that kids have 'Our Newsround team are passionate about reporting news stories that speak to the lives of today's children' 