 News, Monday, September 21, 2020 359 mots, p. 1

Charles: Climate change will dwarf damage of pandemic
By Hannah Furness Royal CoRRespondent

THE Prince of Wales will today warn of a looming environmental crisis that will "dwarf " the negative impact of coronavirus, as he says the world risks missing an opportunity to "reset".

The Prince, who delivers the opening speech at Climate Week 2020, will say the pandemic is a "wake-up call we cannot ignore". In a message recorded at Birkhall, his Scottish home, and delivered online, he urges "swift and immediate action" to change the world for the better. He joins leaders and environ mental campaigners for the summit, which takes place annually alongside the United Nations General Assembly.

The Prince recently launched the "Great Reset" project at a virtual meeting of the World Economic Forum, calling on business and political leaders to ensure global economies were rebuilt with the balance of nature at their heart.

The Prince will say: "Without swift and immediate action at an unprece dented pace and scale, we will miss the window of opportunity to 'reset' for… a more sustainable and inclusive future.

In other words, the global pandemic is a wake-up call we cannot ignore.

"[The] crisis has been with us for far too many years; decried, denigrated and denied. It is now rapidly becoming a comprehensive catastrophe that will dwarf the impact of the pandemic." The Prince, 71, who tested positive for the virus in March, has previously urged the Commonwealth to tackle climate change. In June, he spoke at a virtual meeting of the 54 UN Commonwealth Ambassadors about "The Great Reset".

His concern for the environment has been echoed by other members of the Royal family. Next month, the Duke of Cambridge speaks at TEDX Countdown on climate change, regeneration and protecting nature. Before the pan demic, the Duke launched the Earth shot Prize to find solutions to the "world's greatest problems by 2030".

Last month, a study by Leeds university suggested that while lockdown meant a fall in greenhouse gases and pollutants from vehicles and industry, the impact would be only short-lived. Analysis showed global temperatures would be just 0.01C lower than expected by 2030 as a result of the pause.
