

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Friday, February 26, 2021 539 mots, p. 2

'Slow' ocean may cause climate chaos
Atlantic 'conveyor belt' at its most sluggish in 1,000 years may lead to extreme weather, warn
scientists

By Emma Gatten environment editor

THE Atlantic current system that maintains mild weather in Europe is at its weakest in over a millennium,
most likely because of climate change, scientists have found.

The Atlantic Meridional Overturning Circulation (Amoc) is part of a system of ocean currents that acts as a
conveyor belt to move water around the Earth, redistributing heat and acting as a key link in maintaining the
world's climate.

It began a serious slowdown around 1850 and is now at its slowest in 1,000 years, according to a study in the
journal Nature Geoscience.

It is not certain what the impact of further weakening will be on weather patterns, but scientists believe it
could bring more heatwaves in Europe, and sea level rise on the east coast of the US.

The impact of changing water temperatures is also potentially devastating for some marine life, with the
slow down already linked to lower cod numbers off Maine.

Some evidence suggests there could be a "tipping point" sometime after 2100 when the system collapses,
which could cause intense winter storms in Europe and a signiﬁcant cooling effect across the northern
hemisphere that would not be offset by global warming.

Co-author Dr David Thornalley, from

University College London, said: "This study shows the increasing evidence in support of the modern Atlantic
Ocean   undergoing   unprecedented   changes   in   comparison   to   the   last   millennium,   and   in   some   cases
longer."

Scientists from Ireland, Britain and Germany looked at 11 different sources of data, including tree rings, ocean
sediment and corals.

The Amoc has only been directly measured since 2004, leaving scientists to rely on indirect measurements
such as these to monitor historic change, which produce imprecise results.

Dr Laura Jackson, a Met Ofﬁce scientist specialising in Amoc who was not involved in the study, said there
were "still uncertainties associated with using these indirect observations".

But the paper adds to previous research that found a weakening of the Amoc, with one study suggesting
there has been a 15 per cent decrease since the mid-century.

Climate change models assume a slowing of the Amoc, because the water is driven by its density, which is
due to low temperatures and salinity.

Both of these are expected to change as greenhouse gases warm the atmosphere and melting ice and
increased rainfall reduces saline content. Dr Andrew Meijers, deputy science leader of polar oceans at British
Antarctic Survey, said: "The Amoc has a profound inﬂuence on global climate, and particularly in North
America and Europe, so this evidence of an ongoing weakening of the circulation is critical new evidence for
the interpretation of future projections of regional and global climate." But Tim Palmer, a professor in cli
mate physics at Oxford University, said: "The extent to which Amoc variability affects European weather is a
matter of great uncertainty, as there are many other drivers for variations in European weather, including
atmospheric chaos.

"Overall, this is an interesting study.



 



However, it shouldn't be over-interpreted."


1850 The year, roughly, that the ocean 'conveyor belt' began to slow. It could now cause more heatwaves in
Europe, it is claimed

