



The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)

Business, Monday, April 5, 2021 501 mots, p. 3

Business

Barclays   accused   of   bankrolling   oil   giants   despite   climate   pledge

By Lucy Burton

ACTIVISTS have  accused   Barclays   of   bankrolling  multibillion-pound deals that
expanded the fossil fuel industry last year  despite  the bank vowing to act on  climate
change.

The UK bank last year participated in deals that arranged $97.6bn (£70.6bn)  of  loans
and bonds for eight  of  the world's largest  oil  and gas companies, BP, Chevron, Eni,
Equinor, ExxonMobil, Repsol, Shell and Total,  despite  promising to shrink its car bon
footprint to net zero by 2050, according to  climate  campaigners Market Forces.

The figures come as shareholders pile pressure on to the bank over its  climate  change
policies for the second year in a row as it remains one  of  Europe's largest backers  of
fossil fuels.

Rev Canon Dr John Hall, who is among the 100 investors backing a resolution demanding
that  Barclays  phase out its financing for coal,  oil  and gas companies, said last week that
"the house is on fire but the financial institutions backing the fossil fuel industry are
acting like arsonists".

Adam McGibbon, a UK campaigner for Market Forces who carried out the latest research,
said the bank is not breaking its  climate  change policies by financing these deals. But he
added: "It's just the policies are so inadequate."

" Barclays  can say it's aligned with the Paris Agreement, or it can fund a massive
expansion  of  the fossil fuel industry - it can't do both," he said.

The campaign group has already tabled a resolution to be presented at the bank's annual
meeting in May, urging  Barclays  to detail clearer plans on how it intends to phase out
fossil fuel financing amid concerns little has changed since the bank was confronted with
a landmark resolution from a group  of  investors a year ago.

The world's biggest banks have come under mounting pressure to phase out the financing
of  dirty energy sources, with investor concerns coming up in board meetings and
Extinction Rebellion staging protests.



Earlier this month HSBC dodged a backlash from major investors by pledging to phase
out financing  of  coal-fired power by 2040.

However, some large financial companies have been  accused   of  "green washing" since
pledging to act on  climate  change.

In January a group  of  researchers argued that BlackRock's  pledge  to act on  climate
change did not cover the investment giant's passive investments, which account for
around two thirds  of  its assets under management.

Last week Extinction Rebellion activists posed as dead bodies outside two  Barclays
branches in Scotland and splashed black dye over the Bank  of  England.

A spokesman for  Barclays  said: "We have made a commitment to align our entire
financing portfolio to the goals  of  the Paris Agreement, with specific targets and
transparent reporting, on the way to achieving our ambition to be a net zero bank by
2050.

"We believe that  Barclays  can make a real contribution to tackling  climate  change and
help accelerate the transition to a low-carbon economy.

"We continue to discuss our ambi tion and progress with our investors."

 
 




