 News, Friday, December 3, 2021 423 mots, p. 11  Raise tax on gas to reflect cost of global warming, ministers told By Olivia Rudgard environment correspondent  GAS for boilers should face higher taxes to meet net zero pledges, the Government's climate advisers have said.  Fossil-fuel heating should be more expensive to reflect the costs of global warming, according to the Climate Change Committee (CCC).  A clause in the Glasgow Pact, signed last month, requires countries to phase out "inefficient fossil-fuel subsidies".  The lack of a levy on gas to reflect the cost of carbon emissions is a form of subsidy, the committee said, and the Treasury should review tax policy and how it could better help reach the UK's goal of reaching net zero by 2050.  Currently, electricity is artificially expensive, with almost a fifth of the domestic cost made up of levies funding decarbonisation projects, as well as subsidising energy for poorer households, while just two per cent of the price of gas comes from these costs. On average, households currently spend £159 on green levies on their electricity bills.  Domestic energy bills also have a reduced rate of VAT with householders paying five per cent rather than the usual 20 per cent. The Government plans to "review the imbalance between gas and electricity prices", the CCC said, but a more fundamental shift in policy was needed.  The Government's position is that the UK does not have fossil-fuel subsidies because it does not have a policy to artificially lower prices to below market rates. But the CCC said the failure to introduce carbon pricing was effec tively a subsidy because it meant prices did not reflect the cost of the climate change caused by fossil fuels.  "By this definition, reduced VAT and the lack of a carbon price on gas and other fossil fuels used for heating buildings, and the lack of VAT or a carbon price on aviation fuel are all post-tax subsidies," the committee said.  Chris Stark, chief executive of the committee, said: "No fossil-fuel subsidies should be classed as 'efficient', given there are other ways to support vulnerable consumers with fuel bills."  Tony Juniper, of the Government's nature adviser Natural England, said the "downsides" of environmentally unfriendly and unhealthy diets and dirty rivers were "hidden" from con sumers because of cheap food prices and water bills and that prices should rise to reflect environmental costs.  The Government also unveiled the first stage of its new farming subsidy programme, to reward farmers for environmentally friendly practices. 