 News, Tuesday, November 9, 2021 574 mots, p. 1,2  Nationalists put climate fight at risk, says Obama in SNP 'rebuke'  Sturgeon 'exploited position to push indyref ' at Cop26 By Daniel Sanderson  BARACK OBAMA warned that the "rise of nationalism and tribal impulses" is damaging the fight against climate change, in what Scottish Unionists claimed as a rebuke to Nicola Sturgeon's "divisive" independence campaign.  The former US president, in an address to Cop26 delegates in Glasgow, called for rival countries and opposing political factions to come together to address the climate emergency, but warned that "international cooperation has waned".  The Scottish Tories claimed that Mr Obama was "absolutely right to highlight that nationalism poses a danger in our fight against climate change".  The SNP faced criticism last week when it took out Cop26-themed newspaper adverts to promote independ ence, with the First Minister welcoming visitors to what she described as a "nation in waiting".  In his speech, Mr Obama said that greater global tensions had been caused "in part because of the pandemic, in part because of the rise of nationalism and tribal impulses around the world".  He added: "I understand that it's harder to get international cooperation if there are more global tensions. But Continued on Page 2  Continued from Page 1 there is one thing that should transcend our day to day politics and normal geopolitics - and that is climate."  Donald Cameron, the constitution spokesman for the Scottish Conservatives, said: "The SNP should listen when he says it is critical everyone puts aside their narrow tribal interests if we are to hit net zero targets.  "The SNP are too focused on pushing for another divisive independence referendum, rather than on the climate emergency, or they wouldn't have missed their own emissions targets three years in a row."  While in the White House, Mr Obama intervened in the 2014 Scottish inde pendence campaign with comments that were widely seen as supportive of a No vote.  He said that "from the outside at least, things had worked pretty well" in the UK and that the US had a "deep interest" in its ally remaining "united".  Alex Cole-Hamilton, the leader of the Scottish Liberal Democrats, said that Ms Sturgeon had "exploited her position on the global stage to push her divisive independence agenda rather than green sustainable solutions".  Mr Cole-Hamilton added: "We are all in this together and we can only find solutions to the climate emergency if we all cooperate, within the UK and at global level.  "Mr Obama is quite right in saying that nationalism is a barrier to that."  Shortly before Mr Obama arrived at the Cop venue, there were dramatic scenes near by when armed undercover police officers blocked off a car and arrested two men.  Several vehicles blocked off a dark coloured Volkswagen car and more than half a dozen plain clothes officers, some carrying assault rifles and covering their faces with masks, dragged the men from the car and threw them to the ground face down.  Police Scotland later said that a 43-year-old had been arrested in connection with firearms offences after a previous search of his home.  An SNP spokesman said: "The Tory and Lib Dems' claims are nonsense. As President Obama says, the risk to the Paris Agreement and to the climate has come from the likes of Donald Trump - not a Scottish Government that is leading on climate change, stepping up to fight for climate justice and calling for urgent, multilateral action during this Cop summit." 