 News, Saturday, September 19, 2020 627 mots, p. 3

Gardening in autumn will bring mellow fruitfulness

Planting bulbs and trees now is better than spring, says RHS as climate change increases dryness
By Helena Horton

AUTUMN should be considered more important than spring for gardening as Britain becomes drier in the warmer months, the Royal Horticultural Society has suggested.

Climate change could mean greenfingered people will have to change the way they garden and the months when they plant their bulbs. By caring for their gardens now, people will be able to conserve water if there is a drought, the organisation said.

This new focus on autumn will require a shift in thinking for Britain's gardeners. A new survey by YouGov, commissioned by the RHS, found that almost seven in 10 people (68 per cent) think spring is the most important gardening season, compared with 8 per cent who think it is autumn.

The RHS explained that autumn is the ideal time for gardening as the soil is moist and warm, but not yet soggy, and so easy to plant while giving plants more time to grow new roots and be less vulnerable to dry periods in summer. Evergreens in particular establish well in autumn without the difficult fluctuations of spring weather and, when planted in spring, they usually need significant watering.

Trees are also better planted in autumn or winter. Autumn is especially best for planting trees in clay soils, which can be sticky in the winter and dry to very hard in spring. Just 22 per cent of UK adults think trees should be planted in autumn and only 8 per cent in winter, with one in three saying they do not know when to plant trees (32 per cent) and 30 per cent favouring planting in spring with 4 per cent in summer. Sue Biggs, RHS director general, said: "Helping people to garden is core to the RHS's being, especially for the environment and their health, happiness and wellbeing.

"With the recent growth in gardening, many don't know that autumn is arguably the most important gardening season, which is something we're committed to changing by promoting and sharing the benefits of gardening now. Water is a critical issue and planting evergreens, trees and many perennials over autumn usually means that we can water a lot less, with cooler climates and higher levels of rain. We are seeing more dry and hot spring and summer months, when people can use a lot of water to keep newly planted plants alive."

Fallen leaves can also be brilliant for growing plants in autumn, the RHS added, as leafmould compost can be made from them.

Just over half of UK adults who garden or grow plants outside (54 per cent) deal with garden waste in the autumn by putting it in their council green waste bin, followed by 30 per cent who will compost it, and one in 10 who will take it all to the green waste tip.

Of those who had fallen leaves to deal with, 8 per cent said they used them to make leafmould, but 29 per cent added their leaf waste to their compost bin. The council green waste bin was the most popular way to get rid of leaves with some 43 per cent using this method.

Guy Barter, the RHS chief horticulturist, said: "Making leafmould helps the environment by eliminating the cost and carbon emissions associated with green waste collection. Equally beneficial is raking leaves into heaps under shrubs and trees - they rot away by July and won't promote slug damage or smother lawns and plants around woody plants. Garden compost makes brilliant soil improver, second only to leaf mould."

