 News, Thursday, November 12, 2020 401 mots, p. 15

Kerry set to take on US climate envoy role
By Tony Diver

JOE BIDEN is set to appoint John Kerry, the former US secretary of state, as his special envoy on climate change, The Daily Telegraph understands.

Mr Kerry, who has been vocal on the issue of climate change, is expected to be appointed to represent the United States at international events including the UK's COP26 conference next year.

Mr Kerry worked with Mr Biden, the president-elect, during their time in the Obama administration, as secretary of state and vice-president respectively.

A British figure close to Mr Kerry told The Telegraph his appointment would likely be announced after Mr Biden's cabinet is formed, but hiring decisions for the next administration are not expected for some weeks.

If he is offered the role, Mr Kerry's appointment would not need to be confirmed by the US Senate. He would work under the secretary of state, the equivalent of the UK's foreign secretary.

Since leaving the Obama administration and ostensibly retiring, Mr Kerry has signed an agreement to publish his memoirs and commentated on American politics.

He has been a fierce critic of Donald Trump's presidency and a cheerleader for Mr Biden.

Asked about Mr Biden's suitability for the presidency in December 2019, Mr Kerry said: "He'll be ready on day one to put back together the country and the world that Trump has broken apart." As special envoy, Mr Kerry would be responsible for attending events designed to reach consensus on climate issues, including COP26, which is being hosted in Glasgow next year.

Boris Johnson has invited Mr Biden to attend COP26 himself. In a call to the president-elect on Tuesday, Mr Johnson congratulated Mr Biden and suggested the UK and US could work together on climate policy.

A statement released by Downing

Street said the leaders share priorities on "tackling climate change, promoting democracy, and building back better from the pandemic".

Mr Biden has pledged to rejoin the Paris accords, an international agreement on climate and emissions Mr Trump abandoned.

The Paris accords were originally signed by Mr Kerry on behalf of the US.

Mr Biden has also vowed to make US electricity production carbon-free by 2035 and to achieve net-zero emissions by 2050. The UN Climate Change Conference was delayed by the pandemic.
