

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Thursday, March 25, 2021 523 mots, p. 13

Stalkers alarmed by deer culls 'to help environment'
Landowners fear that Scotland's ambitious plans in face of climate crisis may cause serious
difﬁculties

By Richard Baynes

SWEEPING changes to deer management designed to protect the environment in the face of climate and
biodiversity crises are to be brought in by the Scottish Government.

The move has been welcomed by environmentalists, but stalkers and some estate managers fear plans to
achieve big cuts in deer numbers could cause them serious difﬁculties. The changes were revealed yesterday
when the Scottish Government responded to an in-depth report on deer published last year.

The Deer Working Group (DWG) report was prompted by fears of environmental damage to carbon-storing
woodland and peat caused by the country's herd, which now stands at over a million. Conservationists want
to see numbers halved at least.

Among the report's recommendations accepted by the Scottish Government are keeping deer densities
below   10   per   square   kilometre   across   much   of   the   Highlands,   development   of   plans   to   impose   legally
enforceable cull targets via a "planned cull approval system" and use of existing powers to force culls.

This would take control of numbers out of landowners' hands, and some fear they could be left with too few
deer for commercial stalking.

A decision on whether to extend the hind-shooting season from mid-February into April, which led to fears
stalkers would have to shoot and disembowel heavily pregnant hinds, has been deferred - but stalkers are
angry it is not completely off the table, and concerned use of night-sights could be legalised.

In total the Scottish Government accepted 94 of the 99 recommendations in the DWG report. The plan for 10
red deer per square kilometre as the limit over large areas of the Highlands suggests this could be reviewed
"in light of developments in public policies, including climate change measures" - likely to mean an even
lower density.

The Government is also backing measures to cut the number of deer starving to death in winter - which
could only be done with bigger culls.

Introducing the response, Roseanna

Cunningham,   the   environment   and  climate change   minister,   said   the   last   decade   has   seen   signiﬁcant
progress in dealing with the deer problem.

But she said protecting investments in natural solutions to carbon investment and boosting biodiversity
must now be the focus of deer management.

"We recognise that now is the time to step up our deer management work," she said. "The twin climate and
biodiversity crises require a much greater urgency to our efforts to ensure sustainable deer management
and we must recognise more can and must be done to better realise our ambitious targets on vital issues
such as forestry regeneration, woodland creation, peatland restoration and habitat improvement."

Alex Hogg, the chairman of the Scottish Gamekeepers Association, said: "The direction is clear: iconic deer
stand in the way. Wildlife and green groups will be rejoicing."

He added: "Sanctioning night scopes for culls will be endorsing something illegal across much of Europe.
Asking deer managers to cut large moving calves from the stomachs of pregnant hinds into mid-April must
be off the table if the Scottish Government wants to avoid public distaste."



 
