

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Wednesday, January 27, 2021 318 mots, p. 11

Britons are world's most concerned by climate change,
study ﬁnds

By Olivia Rudgard EnvironmEnt CORRESPONDENT

BRITONS are the most concerned people in the world about climate change, with four ﬁfths believing it is a
global emergency, research has shown.

A survey of 1.2 million people by the UN Development Programme (UNDP)

found that UK respondents had the highest levels of concern, alongside Italy, with 81 per cent across all age
groups regarding the situation as an emergency.

In the UK, 86 per cent of under-18s and 78 per cent of over-60s believed this, compared with 69 and 58 per
cent globally.

The poll is thought to be the largest ever of public opinion on climate change and appeared as an advert on
mobile phone games including Words with Friends, Angry Birds, Dragon City, Temple Run, and Subway
Surfers.

In   all   countries   more   under-18s   than   over-60s   believed   that  climate change   was   an   emergency,   and   a
majority   believed   so   in   every   age   group.   More   than   half   of   respondents   supported   policies   such   as
investment in wind and solar and climate-friendly farming techniques. Among the least popular policies was
the promotion of plant-based diets, with just 30 per cent supporting this.

UNDP administrator Achim Steiner said: "The results illustrate that urgent climate action has broad support
around the globe, across nationalities, age, gender and education levels."

Last year, Boris Johnson launched a 10-point environment plan to cut emissions, with goals that include
banning new petrol and diesel cars by 2030.

But this week the ﬂagship Environment Bill to create powers for new legally-binding targets in areas such as
air pollution and biodiversity conservation, was delayed for at least six months.

Richard Black, senior associate at the non-proﬁt think tank the Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit, said of
the survey: "This shows that ministers have a social licence to enact policies in the coming months that will
put the UK on track to its net zero target."

 


