

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Thursday, March 11, 2021 417 mots, p. 6

Knebworth House cracks after being hit by climate change

By Olivia Rudgard environment correspondent

A TURRET at Knebworth House has developed huge cracks after extreme weather due to climate change.

The Hertfordshire country house, parts of which date back to the 15th century, developed the faults in its
northwest turret as a result of changes to temperature and rainfall, Historic England said.

It was previously repaired in the 1990s but staff noticed the cracks reappearing and growing over the past
ﬁve years, prompting an investigation by the government body, which has now awarded a grant of £74,175
for repairs.

A set of foundations which combines Tudor and Victorian engineering is also thought to be at fault.

An ongoing programme of repairs which started in the mid-20th century has so far cost £5million, £1million
of which has come from Historic England.

The new cracks are "thought to be associated with climate change: increased levels and cycles of rainfall
combined with periods of higher temperatures," it said. Rainfall can cause erosion, mould and leaks in old
buildings, while extreme temperature ﬂuctuations put structures under stress.

Once owned by the 19th century writer and translator Sir Edward Bulwer-Lytton, famous for coining the
phrases "it was a dark and stormy night" and "the pen is mightier than the sword", in modern times it has
been used as a ﬁlming location for The Crown, Paddington 2, The King's Speech and Batman the Movie.

Purchased by the Lytton family in 1490, the house has been remodelled several times and was redesigned in
the early 19th century by well-known architect Sir Edwin Lutyens, after he married Lady Emily Bulwer-Lytton.

Tony Calladine, the regional director for Historic England in the east of England said: "Knebworth House is an
important historic building and a major visitor attraction. We're pleased to support the urgent repairs to the
northwest turret of the house to ensure that this remarkable property can be enjoyed by visitors in the
future."

Dr Robert Fernley, the chairman of the Knebworth House Education and Preservation Trust, said: "We are
extremely grateful to have received this support from Historic England.

"This grant will allow us to carry out emergency repairs that will enable us to continue visitor access to
Knebworth House and retain employment."

'This grant will allow us to carry out emergency repairs that will help us to continue visitor access and retain
employment'

