 News, Thursday, July 30, 2020 386 mots, p. 12

Farmers angry as council bans meat in drive to help tackle climate change
By Helena Horton

A MEAT ban, as part of a local authority's "climate change action plan", has prompted criticism that it lacks "understanding" of British farming.

Enfield council in north-east London will not be serving meat at any of its catered events from this Christmas as it hopes to "influence the behaviour" of local businesses and suppliers.

The local authority is understood to be the first in the United Kingdom to announce such a move. Ian Barnes, the deputy leader of the council, said it had already announced a climate emergency and this is one of the steps being taken to make sure the local authority is carbon neutral by 2030.

Ensuring Enfield is carbon neutral in 10 years means "taking bold and sometimes unpopular action", he wrote in the council's climate report.

The report added: "All events held by Enfield council, where catering is provided, are to offer only vegan or vegetarian options."

The Labour-controlled authority uploaded the extensive "Enfield climate action plan 2020" online after holding a month-long consultation during the coronavirus lockdown.

However, countryside campaigners have said the policy ignores the ambitious efforts being made by British farmers to achieve net-zero emissions by 2040. This is the target set by the National Farmers' Union.

Farmers argue that a blanket ban on meat in this way makes no differentiation between the industrial farming systems in countries such as the United States and Brazil and the mainly grassfed systems in use in Britain.

The council's move comes after similar initiatives taken at both Goldsmiths and Cambridge universities, which have seen red meat removed from their campus menus.

Commenting on the proposal, Mo Metcalf-Fisher, spokesman for the Countryside Alliance, said: "Banning meat is completely the wrong approach and demonstrates no understanding of how meat in this country is produced - which, thanks to UK farming practices, is among the most sustainable in the world.

"That this ban has gone through with what appears to be very limited public consultation, is damning."

"Enfield borough council would do well to actually liaise with the farming community, properly consult their local residents and drop this proposed ban immediately," he added. 