Climate Point: Biden takes aim at fossil fuels, while Alberta, Canada, takes aim at journalists

Mark Olalde | USA TODAY
Welcome to Climate Point, your weekly guide to climate, energy and environment news from around the Golden State and the country. In Palm Springs, Calif., I'm Mark Olalde.
President Joe Biden has been in the White House for a little more than a week, and the hits keep on coming for the environment. Some of his earliest actions on his first day related to climate change (more on that later), and Wednesday was dubbed "Climate Day." Among other things, Biden used the day to commit to setting aside 30% of federal land and water for conservation by 2030, to pause new oil and gas leases on federal land and to begin eliminating fossil fuel subsidies. HuffPost has a helpful breakdown here.
"President Biden set ambitious goals that will ensure America and the world can meet the urgent demands of the climate crisis, while empowering American workers and businesses to lead a clean energy revolution that achieves a carbon pollution-free power sector by 2035 and puts the United States on an irreversible path to a net-zero economy by 2050," according to a White House statement on his overarching plans.
Some of the plans, though, such as the pause on new oil and gas leases, do little to actually slow fossil fuel extraction. In that case, oil and gas companies had stockpiled permits in advance of the inauguration to circumvent such an order. USA Today has more on that. Still, environmentalists and climate scientists hope these actions are a sign of even more to come.
Here's some other important reporting...
MUST-READ STORIES
Chilling effect. As a journalist, I'm used to receiving reader input and complaints. What I'm still not used to even after four years of the last administration, is a full-throated attack on the free press by the government. Geoff Dembicki is out with an unsettling story for Vice in which he revealed the party controlling Alberta's provincial government in Canada paid thousands of dollars to slander environment journalists as part of a multimillion dollar investigation going after environmentalists. Among those targeted in the conservative party's report were a professional group to which I belong and a reputable publication for which I previously reported. In an additional odd twist, the report was written by a "home-school teacher in England." Needless to say, she failed to reach out to journalists for comment.


Rigging the reports. E&E's Benjamin Storrow is out with another compelling investigation, this time into utilities' proclivity to use tricky data and carbon accounting to make big claims about how much they're cutting in greenhouse gas emissions. "The guidelines governing public emissions reporting are vague and voluntary, enabling companies to embellish their reductions, while making it difficult to compare one utility with another," he writes.
The temperature is too damn high. Over in the Southwest, Erin Stone of The Arizona Republic digs into disparities in resources between urban and rural communities as temperatures soar. In many outlying areas, she found rising heat was bringing deadly health implications with few options for refuges like cooling centers.
Endangered. If you want a feel-good story, please skip this one. Jimmy Tobias has a new project out with The Intercept in which he uses a fight over development in Florida as a case study for how a key conservation agency is succumbing to outside pressure. As he sees it, we're left with a "politicized (U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service) that is struggling to uphold the Endangered Species Act amid a growing global extinction crisis."
BIDEN GETS GOING
"Climate Day" was only part of Biden's early steps on climate change and the environment. Here's a run-down of some of his other early big decisions:
Little known, big impact. You've probably never heard of the Office of Information and Regulatory Affairs, so don't feel bad if you missed this story. It's housed within the Office of Management and Budget and gives proposed agency regulations a once-over to vet them. But, a Biden-approved memo titled "Modernizing Regulatory Review" looks to revamp how the office functions, shifting it from mainly producing an economic costbenefit analysis to studying a broader range of impacts. "The memo could unleash a wave of stronger regulations to reduce income inequality, fight climate change and protect public health," HuffPost writes. "Among left-leaning experts on regulation, it's a signal that Biden could break with 40 years of conservative policy."
Climate cash. Meanwhile, over at the Federal Reserve (Aren't you glad you're getting a tour of our bureaucracy this week?), a new committee was announced to "deepen the central bank's understanding of the risks that climate change poses to the financial system." E&E reports on what this means for the banking sector.
Environmental justice gets a nod. Another executive order Biden signed directs the Department of Justice to "consider establishing an environmental justice office," Bloomberg reports. If created, the office would partner with the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency and others to coordinate work on the topic, which relates to disproportionate impacts of environmental woes on disadvantaged communities.
Go day. And finally, let's not forget Day 1. Presidents often like to take their seat in the Oval Office in front of news cameras only hours after the inauguration, a stack of executive orders filled with campaign promises already there and awaiting their signature. Biden was no different. On the climate front, his Day 1 moves will have the U.S. rejoin the


Paris Agreement and cancel the Keystone XL pipeline, among other things. USA Today's Doyle Rice has the story. But conservatives aren't letting him move forward that easily. While Democratic California Attorney General Xavier Becerra acted as the main antagonist throwing darts at former President Donald Trump's attacks on environmental policy, Republican Gov. Greg Abbott of Texas has publicly announced that he's looking to fight Biden on the environment. The Austin American-Statesman has all the details.
AND ANOTHER THING
The transition has begun. Just think. You unplug your car, push the button to quietly turn it on, touch the right pedal (perhaps we'll call it an "electrons pedal") and off you go with the instant torque that comes with electric vehicles. While still in the future, this reality is looking closer every day. The Detroit Free Press reports that General Motors, one of the Big Three automakers, announced Thursday that it "aspires" by 2035 to only be producing cars, pickups and SUVs that are zero emission. Then, in another five years, it wants its "global products and plants to be carbon neutral." Scientists agree that to maintain a livable planet, we need to reduce the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration back to 350 ppm. We're above that and rising dangerously. Here are the latest numbers:


