Fact check: Post quoting Amy Coney Barrett and Greta Thunberg on climate change is true    true/6086275002  Camille Caldera | USA TODAY  The claim: Amy Coney Barrett and Greta Thunberg quoted on climate change  A post on Facebook by the Other 98% compares a quote it attributes to Supreme Court Justice Amy Coney Barrett with a quote it attributes to climate activist Greta Thunberg.  “I’ve read things about climate change... I would not say that I have firm views on it,” Barrett said.  "To be fair, I don't have any 'views on climate change' either. Just like I don't have any 'views' on gravity, the fact that the earth is round, photosynthesis nor evolution... But understanding and knowing their existence really makes life in the 21st century so much easier," Thunberg said.  The Other 98% has not responded to a request from USA TODAY for comment.  More: Fact check: There is no Sen. Rob Donaldson, so posts of his speech about Barrett are fake  The quotes are real — from ACB's confirmation hearing and Thunberg's Twitter  Both quotes are real.  Multiple senators questioned Barrett on the issue of climate change at her confirmation hearings earlier this month.  On Oct. 13, Sen. John Kennedy, R-La., asked the nominee what she thought about climate change, per The Hill.     “I’ve read about climate change,” Barrett said.  “And you have some opinions on climate change that you’ve thought about?” Kennedy asked.  “I’m certainly not a scientist,” Barrett replied. “I’ve read things about climate change. I would not say that I have firm views on it."  Get the facts  Trending fact-checks  On Oct. 14, Sen. Richard Blumenthal, D-Conn., asked Barrett about those comments and asked her if she believed "human beings cause global warming," per USA TODAY.  "I don't think I am competent to opine on what causes global warming or not," she responded. "I don't think that my views on global warming or climate change are relevant to the job I would do as a judge, nor do I feel like I have views that are informed enough, and I haven't studied scientific data. I'm not really in a position to offer any kind of informed opinion."  On Oct. 15, Thunberg retweeted a video of the exchange between Blumenthal and Barrett with the quote cited by the Other 98%.  "To be fair, I don't have any 'views on climate change' either. Just like I don't have any 'views' on gravity, the fact that the earth is round, photosynthesis nor evolution... But understanding and knowing their existence really makes life in the 21st century so much easier," Thunberg wrote on Twitter.   Our rating: True  Based on our research, these quotes by Supreme Court Justice Amy Coney Barrett and climate activist Greta Thunberg on their "views" on climate change are TRUE. The remark from Coney Barrett came at her confirmation hearings, and Thunberg later reacted on Twitter.  Our fact-check sources:  The Hill, Oct. 14, Barrett says she doesn't have 'firm views' on climate change USA TODAY, Oct. 14, Amy Coney Barrett hearing live updates: ‘You will be confirmed, God willing’: Senators end questioning of Barrett Greta Thunberg, Oct. 15, Tweet      