

The New York Times (web site)
Friday, February 12, 2021 -  364 mots

Janet Yellen says the U.S. will rebuild alliances and refocus
on climate change.

By Alan Rappeport

Treasury Secretary Janet L. Yellen told the world’s top economic ofﬁcials on Friday that the United States
intended to deepen international alliances and re-engage in the ﬁght against climate change.

Ms. Yellen’s comments came during her ﬁrst Group of 7 meeting in her role as Treasury secretary and
reﬂected the Biden administration’s efforts to embrace the types of multilateral institutions that the Trump
administration tended to hold in low regard. The meeting of the leading industrial nations, which was held
virtually, came as the global economy continues to grapple with the fallout from the coronavirus pandemic
and as countries are racing to deploy vaccines.

The United States “places a high priority on deepening our international engagement and strengthening our
alliances,” Ms. Yellen said.

Ms.   Yellen  told  ﬁnance   ministers   and   central   bank   governors   of   the   G7   that  further   ﬁscal   support   was
needed, saying, “The need to go big is now,” according to a summary of her remarks provided by the
Treasury Department. The sentiment echoes what Ms. Yellen has told lawmakers in the United States as
President Biden looks to push a $1.9 trillion stimulus package.

Ms. Yellen highlighted climate change as an issue where the United States will resume a position as a global
leader, noting, “We understand the crucial role that the United States must play in the global climate effort.”
She indicated that the Treasury’s engagement on the issue would change substantially from the stance
taken by her predecessor, Steven Mnuchin.

At a Group of 20 summit meeting a year ago, Mr. Mnuchin resisted the inclusion of the phrase “climate
change” in a joint statement that was drafted at the conclusion of the meeting.

Ms. Yellen plans to appoint a senior climate ofﬁcial at the Treasury Department and create a hub within the
agency to focus on policies that will combat climate change.

The G7 is being hosted by Britain this year. Rishi Sunak, the chancellor of the Exchequer, said climate
considerations should be a central part of the group’s agenda this year with a goal of a “truly green economic
recovery.”

 


