The GPeoples'

Climate Vote

United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) UNDP partners with people at all levels of society to help build nations that can withstand crisis, and drive and sustain the kind of growth that improves the quality of life for everyone. On the ground in nearly 170 countries and territories, we offer global perspective and local insight to help empower lives and build resilient nations.
On climate change, UNDP has the largest portfolio in the UN system and works with over 140 countries around the world. UNDP, through its Climate Promise, supports 120 countries to enhance their climate change pledges ­ Nationally Determined Contributions or NDCs ­ under the Paris Agreement.
University of Oxford Department of Sociology Oxford Sociology is at the forefront of ground-breaking empirical research which spans the full spectrum of the social world. We apply a diverse range of rigorous methods to real-world issues in order to address the most pressing societal challenges of our times. Our commitment to collaborative research ensures that our researchers have the freedom to transcend disciplinary boundaries, foster international partnerships, and explore innovative research. Some of the themes that our researchers are currently working on include social inequality, demography, political sociology, gender and the family, cybercrime and justice, computational social science, and of course the COVID-19 pandemic.
Copyright © UNDP and University of Oxford October 2021 All rights reserved
Disclaimers The views expressed in this publication are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent those of UNDP, its Executive Board, the United Nations Member States. The boundaries and names shown, and the designations used on maps, in this document do not imply official endorsement or acceptance by the United Nations.
Authors UNDP: Cassie Flynn and Eri Yamasumi University of Oxford: Professor Stephen Fisher, Dan Snow, Zack Grant, and Martha Kirby Browning Environmental Communications: Peter Browning, Karina Moxon, Paula Struthoff
Acknowledgements Playmob: Jude Ower, Lou Fawcett, Tania Mendes, and Joost Schuur Cover and design: JT Quirk
We would like to thank the many people at UNDP and partner organizations that have made this publication possible.

"The G20 are some of the biggest economies on the planet ­ what they do will make or break the world's ability to tackle the climate crisis. They must listen to the voices of their people, especially of their future generations, who will inherit the
consequences of actions ­ or inactions ­ of G20 leaders."
Executive

Summary

The world will not be able to tackle the climate crisis without bold action by the world's largest economies. The Group

of 20 (G20), made up of 19 countries and the European

Union, account for over 80% of global gross domestic product

(GDP), 60% of the world's population, and more than 75% of

global greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions. The G20 countries also have immense

impacts across sectors, including 90% of global vehicle sales, 75% of the global

potential for renewables between 2010 and 2030, 60% of the world's agricultural land,

and 80% of world's trade in agricultural products. Given the breadth of their impact, the

actions that G20 governments take to tackle the climate crisis will be critical to the future

of the planet.

In the run-up to the G20 Summit in Rome, and ahead of the UN Climate Change Conference (COP26) in Glasgow, the United Nations Development Programme (UNDP) and the University of Oxford are publishing the G20 Peoples' Climate Vote.

The G20 Peoples' Climate Vote polled over 689,000 people across 18 of the G20 countries from October 2020 until June 2021. This includes over 302,000 young people under the age of 18. It leverages, an innovative survey methodology using mobile gaming networks. The margin of error of the results is on average +/- 2%.

In some countries, it is the first time that the voices of young people ­ who in many countries will be entering the workforce, reaching voting age, and engaging more in civic life in just a few years ­ are heard on climate change. This means the survey has significant value as a predictor of where public opinion is headed on climate policy. It also indicates where stronger efforts to educate the public may be required. .

The G20 and the Climate Emergency
· On average, across the G20 countries surveyed, 65% of adults thought that climate
change is a global emergency, compared with 35% who disagreed. Perception of a climate emergency was higher among under-18s, at 70%. This indicates broad public support for G20 leaders to take urgent action and step up on climate ambition, while also suggesting that this will continue to strengthen in the years to come.
Public Opinion and Climate Finance Policy
· There was majority support for more funding of green businesses and jobs in fourteen
out of the eighteen G20 countries surveyed, with the greatest support among adults in the United Kingdom (74%), followed by Germany, Australia, and Canada (all 68%). Among under-18s, support was highest in Australia (73%).
· In many countries, making companies pay for their pollution was more popular among adults than under-18s. In Japan, Mexico and the Republic of Korea there was a stark difference between these two groups (42% vs 31%, 43% vs 36%, and 41% vs 36%, respectively), indicating more public education is needed.
Public Opinion and Cutting Emissions
· Stopping burning polluting fuels was a popular policy in the United Kingdom, Australia,
Canada, Germany, and France, with majority support among both under-18s and adults in these countries. There were much lower levels of support elsewhere, with just 30% of adults in India and Saudi Arabia supporting this policy, compared to 36% and 32% of under-18s in these countries, respectively.
· Promoting renewable energy was generally a more popular policy among under-18s than
adults, with a generational divide as high as thirteen percentage points in the United States. Support for this policy from under-18s was also high in emerging economies, such as with 64% for Brazil and Turkey, and 62% for Argentina.
· Similarly, there was higher under-18 support for electric vehicles and bicycles, with ten percentage
point differences in Australia and Italy, suggestive of coming shifts in public demand.
· Reducing energy waste received mixed support overall, and some significant levels of
intergenerational differences. For example, in Germany 59% of adults supported this policy as opposed to 44% of under-18s, while Russia saw the opposite outcome: 32% of adults compared to 38% of under-18s.
· Support among adults and under-18s on policies such as conserving forests and land to
address climate change varied depending on the country. It was ten percentage points higher among adults than under-18s in the United Kingdom, for example, whereas in Brazil, Russia and India it was higher among under-18s than adults, ten percent, nine percent and nine percent higher, respectively.
Public Opinion and Climate Adaptation Policy
· There were majority levels of support among adults in twelve of the G20 countries
surveyed for building more resilient infrastructure to protect people and property from extreme weather events. The policy attracted greater support in adults than under-18s, such as for the Republic of Korea, Japan, and Germany.
· Installing more early warning systems to support disaster preparedness was a relatively
popular policy in general and featured higher levels of public support among under-18s than adults in all countries. Support among under-18s was eight percentage points higher than for adults in both France and the United States, and six for Brazil and Turkey.
· There were surprisingly higher levels of support among under-18s than adults for
increasing access to insurance, which can help families, businesses, and communities rebuild after extreme weather events. Under-18s backed this policy with support higher than among adults in the United States (where there was a fourteen percentage point difference), Italy (twelve), and Brazil, France and Japan (where the generational gap was eleven points).
Introduction
On 27 January 2021, the Peoples' Climate Vote was published by the UN Development Programme and the University of Oxford. The survey used an innovative polling methodology by utilizing mobile gaming networks, and delivered the world's largest ever survey of public opinion on climate change, with 1.2 million respondents across 50 countries.
A key finding was that a majority of people in all countries surveyed believe that climate change is a global emergency. In many of the countries, it was also the first time that public opinion on climate policies had ever been gathered. The survey was discussed in government meetings on climate action, and parliaments, all over the world.
The Peoples' Climate Vote is unusual in that, since it uses mobile gaming networks to engage participants, it attracts a very large sample of under-18s whose voices tend to be overlooked in political decision-making1. In a matter of years, these future voters will soon be influencing political decisions, so it is imperative that governments already consider their voices when making decisions that will affect them more and for longer than anyone else.
The G20 Peoples' Climate Vote report gives unique insights into never-before-shared data and a new analysis of people's opinions on climate change from the G20 countries. It compares what under-18s think about the climate to what adults think. This approach is both important and insightful: by looking into data on under-18s, we can predict how the policy priorities of the G20 countries will shift once the new generation of voters enter the workforce, reach voting age, and have greater influence.
This new analysis comes at an incredibly important time on the global stage, not only in the timing ahead of G20 Rome Summit and COP26, but also because of the increasingly important role the G20 plays in the world's economy and trade, COVID-19 stimulus packages which will shape the course of the world, and population growth.
How the Survey was Conducted
The survey was conducted over the course of a year from October 2020 to June 2021, with a sample of over 689,000 people across G20 countries, including more than 302,000 under-18year-olds (under-18s).
Participants were asked two questions about whether they believe climate change is a global emergency and, if so, what speed of action they think the world should take. Then they were asked a series of questions about the different kinds of climate policies that they would like their government to enact. The data were collated and processed by analysts at
1 This is not the case in some G20 countries, where the voting age is younger than 18, namely Argentina and Brazil (16), and Indonesia (17).
the University of Oxford, who weighted the data to create representative estimates of public opinion. The margin of error of the results is on average +/- 2%. For more information on the survey methodology and data availability for different countries, please see the Methodology section of this report.
Public Opinion & Climate Change in the G20
G20 members are not only responsible for around 75% of global greenhouse gas emissions (GHG)2, but also account for over 80% of global GDP, 75% of international trade, and 60% of the world's population3. This group of countries is therefore in a unique position for its collective decisions to significantly influence the success of the world in combating climate change.
Following the G20 Rome Summit, governments will participate in multilateral climate negotiations in Glasgow at COP26, where they are expected to increase their ambition on climate action, including concrete ways to halve global emissions by 2030 and to pursue net zero pathways. All parties, including the G20, are meant to solidify progress toward the goals of the Paris Climate Agreement that was signed at COP21 in Paris in 2015. Notably, under the Paris Agreement, all countries must bring forward ambitious national plans to reduce their emissions across sectors of their economy, known as Nationally Determined Contributions, or NDCs.
As of mid-October 2021, just 16 parties in the G20 have submitted their updated NDCs. While we see some strengthened emission targets from Argentina, Canada, South Africa, the European Union (EU), the United Kingdom, and the United States, others such as China, India, Saudi Arabia, and Turkey (noting recent ratification of the Paris Agreement for Turkey) have yet to submit. Some countries, such as the Republic of Korea and Japan (currently submitted interim), have announced plans to strengthen their targets from what they have previously submitted and will be expected to submit their new NDCs soon. Others, such as Australia, Brazil, Mexico, and Indonesia, submitted updated/revised NDCs that are considered the same or weaker than their previous pledges. The ambition of the G20 NDCs will impact generations. It is therefore time for the governments to listen to the people ­ young and old.
A Climate Emergency?
In the G20 Peoples' Climate Vote, people aged 18 and over (adults) and those under 18 (under-18s), were asked whether they considered climate change a global emergency7. In all countries, large majorities of adults said that climate change is a global emergency, ranging from the United Kingdom (81%) and Italy (80%), to Argentina and India, on 57% and 58% respectively.
On average across the G20 countries surveyed, 65% of adults thought that climate change is a global emergency, compared with higher support among under-18s, at 70%. This indicates there is broad public support across the G20 for leaders calling to step up on ambition and suggests this will strengthen in the years to come.
There was meanwhile a significantly bigger difference between under-18s and adults on the question of whether climate change is a global emergency in some countries than in others. For example, 82% of Australian under-18s for example believe in a climate emergency, compared with 72% of adults, a difference of ten percentage points (see Figure 1). This difference was also significant in the United States (ten percentage points), India (nine) and Canada (eight), indicating that a near-term significant shift in public opinion can be expected in these countries.

Public Support for Different Climate Policies in the G20 ­ differences among adults and under-18s
It is important to recognize that it is not always the case that young people are more supportive of action on climate change than adults. There are educational factors at play here, as the most profound socio-demographic driver of belief in the climate emergency and climate action is a person's educational background4. This is shown in the following table, which presents support among adults and under-18s for 14 different climate policies. Figure 2. Public support for 14 climate policies, comparing participants 18 and over (adults) with those under 18 (under-18s)
The three most popular climate policies among both adults and under-18s were conserving forests and land (56% vs. 59%), promoting renewables (54% vs. 57%), followed by climate-friendly farming (53% vs. 57%). However, the policies where support was greater among under-18s than adults were good and affordable insurance (a difference of five percentage points relative to adults), followed by, more electric cars and buses, and bicycles (five percentage points). Good and affordable insurance is seen by experts as essential for protecting people from damage to property and infrastructure by increased extreme weather events, in particular from flooding events, which are becoming more intense and frequent in many countries, including in the G20 countries. The climate policies where adults were significantly more supportive than under-18s were: making companies pay for their pollution (four percentage points), and building infrastructure and conserving nature to protect people from the impacts of climate change (three percentage points).
The Most Popular Climate Policies in the G20
Participants in the survey, young and old, were asked whether they support climate policies across different topics.
The findings from this survey are presented here, grouped in different sections ­ financing climate action, cutting emissions, and adapting to climate change ­ reflecting the three main areas of negotiation at the climate talks.
Financing Climate Action
The cost of the transition to a low-emissions economy that limits global warming to a safe 1.5°C is estimated at US$3.5 trillion per year5, compared to a total global economy of approximately US$85 trillion per year6. There is no way that this can be achieved without G20 members, which comprise over 80% of global GDP.
But with trillions having been spent already on the COVID-19 pandemic, what are the implications for climate finance? The impacts have been particularly severe for developing countries and emerging economies, and have exacerbated debt pressures on low and middle-income, and climate-vulnerable countries. However, if these countries fail to introduce sustainable recovery packages, global climate goals will be impossible to meet7.
So, what do G20 citizens think? The Peoples' Climate Vote asked them about three policy options.
1. Provide more money for green businesses and jobs
The G20 Sustainable Finance Working Group was recently re-established under the Italian G20 Presidency, which coordinates efforts towards a global green and sustainable recovery from the COVID-19 pandemic8. As an inter-governmental forum, the G20 can help facilitate discussion and collective action among and within G20 governments to promote green businesses and jobs.
Figure 3. Public support for more funding for green businesses and jobs
There was majority support for more funding of green businesses and jobs in most of the G20 countries surveyed, showing both adults and under-18s see the importance of a green economy. Support among the under-18s was greater than adults in eleven countries, and was highest in Australia (73%). The greatest support among adults was in the United Kingdom (74%), followed by Germany, Canada, and Australia (all at 68%). Meanwhile in the Republic of Korea, support for more green investment was significantly higher among adults (56%) compared with under-18s (49%).
2. Make companies pay for their pollution
There are different ways of making companies pay for the pollution that causes climate change, but these typically involve some form of carbon tax or pricing9. The G20 FinanceMinisters officially endorsed carbon pricing for the first time in 202110 and it is gaining momentum in recent months, with initiatives having been launched in China and Germany, while the emissions price in the EU has risen above 50/ton11.
Figure 4. Public support for making companies pay for their pollution
In ten countries out of the eighteen surveyed in the G20, more adults than under-18s wanted to make companies pay for their pollution. In Japan, Mexico and the Republic of Korea there was a stark difference between these two groups (42% vs 31%, 43% vs 36%, and 41% vs 36%, respectively), and support among adults soared in countries such as the United Kingdom (72%), Canada (69%), Australia and Germany (both 66%). These results could indicate that adults are more in favor of using economic instruments, like tax, to help reduce emissions.
3. Require companies to reveal more about how their products are made
The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) reports that industry-related GHG emissions are continuing to rise12. With 75% of both global GHG emissions and trade attributed to G20 countries, there is a leading role to be played in requiring companies to become more transparent on how products are made. This can enable more informed purchases, which could incentivize companies to reduce GHG emissions, among other environmental benefits. Figure 5. Public support for more transparency on how products are made
Requiring companies to report more on how products are made was a less popular policy choice among Peoples' Climate Vote respondents in G20 countries, falling to just 29%
support in the Republic of Korea and Saudi Arabia among the adults. These results indicate more education is required on the environmental impact of supply-chain pollution. Apart from in the United States, there was little difference between adults and under18s on this question. There, the policy has narrow majority support among under-18s, compared with just 45% support among adults. This policy was most popular in Canada and Australia, with majority support among both adults and under-18s in these countries, as well as in France.
Cutting Emissions
The IPCC has found that to limit the global temperature increase to 1.5°C, global CO2 emissions must decrease by 45% by 2030 and reach net-zero by 2050. Given G20 members are responsible for such a high proportion of the world's GHG emissions, deeper and faster reductions are required among the biggest emitters and more advanced economies to reach these targets, which will involve huge efforts across every area of the economy and government policy. In the G20 Peoples' Climate Vote, we asked respondents which climate policies they supported that reduce GHG emissions in both energy, transportation and industry, and nature.
Cutting Emissions in Energy, Transport & Industry
1. Stop burning fuels that pollute
The energy mix of many G20 countries still includes a large share of fossil fuels13 which, when burned, produce carbon dioxide emissions. The transition away from these fuels is a recurring topic in G20 discussions, especially on action to reform fossil-fuel subsidies. A peer review system between the G20 countries was established in 2013 to increase transparency and speed up the energy transition away from fossil fuels. However, G20 action on reducing fossil fuel subsidies has slowed during the COVID-19 pandemic while it recognizes the political challenges that governments face in implementing enduring reform14. It is also complicated by some countries' reliance on domestic production of fuels, and the large numbers of jobs dependent on this activity. Thus, when phasing out fossil fuels, countries must not only consider the transition of its energy source and energy security of people, but also to ensure a just transition for affected communities to adjust through social protection and new skills for green jobs.
Update-2021.pdf
Figure 6. Public support for stopping burning fuels that pollute
Stopping burning fuels that pollute was a popular policy in Australia, Canada, and the European G20 members, with majority support among under-18s and adults, apart from Italy. There were much lower levels of support elsewhere, with just 30% of adults supporting this policy in India and Saudi Arabia, compared to 36% and 32% of under-18s in these countries, respectively. In some countries, there were significantly more under-18s supporting this policy, most notably the United States (by twelve percentage points), and Argentina and India (by six percentage points).
2. Waste less energy
Following many of the large economies of the G20, the last two decades saw many emerging markets and developing economies constructing infrastructure needed to attend to a rapidly developing economy. This is an energy and emissions intensive process and with two-billion people set to be added to the world's population by 2050, this trend will not easily slow down. It is thus predicted that electricity demand will grow rapidly, especially in emerging market and developing economies. The focus now is not only on the clean electrification of the existing and new economies but also on the improvement of energy intensity and efficiency, and a behavioral change in all levels of energy use15. Figure 7. Public support for wasting less energy in homes, buildings, and factories
There is strong support for reducing energy waste in a few countries, with majority support among both adults and under-18s in the United Kingdom, Canada, Australia, France, and the United States. In some of these countries there were notable large discrepancies between adults and under-18s, as it may be indicating who is paying the bills. This generational gap hits fifteen percentage points in Germany. This trend was not universal however: in Russia, for example, under-18s were six percentage points more likely to support action to reduce energy wastage, and in Argentina they were three percentage points more likely.
3. More renewable energy
Greening and decarbonizing the energy mix and extending the electrification to more people through renewable energy is center of the transition strategies for countries. In fact, the share of renewables is expected to increase from 30% of electricity generation globally in 2020 to about 45% in the next ten years, with solar energy alone expected to increase with an average of 125GW of new capacity globally from 2021 to 202516. The Italian Presidency of the G20 has made energy security and the energy transition a key priority in 2021. Currently the G20 hosts approximately 81% of the global installed renewable power generation capacity, as well as 75% of the global potential for deploying renewables between 2010 and 203017. As such, G20 members are playing a pivotal role in the development and deployment of renewable energy18.
Energy.pdf
There was majority support for renewable energy among both adults and under-18s in many of the G20 countries surveyed. More strikingly this policy was more popular among under18s than adults in twelve of eighteen countries, and by as much as ten percentage points in the United States, eight percentage points in France, and seven in Brazil, Russia, and India.
4. More clean electric cars and buses, and bicycles
The transport sector is responsible for nearly one quarter of the world's GHG emissions, with motor vehicles responsible for over three quarters of these. The G20 accounts for over 90% of global vehicle sales, meaning G20 policies on personal transport can significantly influence the trajectory of these emissions, as well as improvements in air quality.19 Despite COVID-19 impacts on sales, about 3 million new electric cars were registered in 2020 worldwide. G20 members led the way, with 1.4 million new registrations in Europe, 1.2 million in China, and 295,000 in the United States. While the European Green Deal proposed an effective ban on the sales of petrol and diesel cars starting 2035 in their 27-country bloc20, and the United States targets 50% electric vehicle sales share by 203021, G20 governments are on a race to introduce electric vehicles through subsidies and other policies. However, electric vehicles make up just 5% of all car sales worldwide today, indicating greater incentives and more consumer education are required.22 There is also a recognition that other forms of transport need to be incorporated into sustainability plans, including non-motorized transport modes (such as cycling and walking). Increasing the infrastructure for this will reduce air pollution, congestion, and have positive health benefits.23 Figure 9. Public support for the use of more clean electric vehicles and bicycles
The G20 Peoples' Climate Vote results marked out electric vehicles and bicycles as a future trend, with consistently higher support for them among under-18s than among adults in all countries for which there is available data. The difference was greatest in the United States, at thirteen percentage points, or 68% versus 55%. The generational divide was also high in Australia and Italy (ten percentage points), France and Germany (nine), and Russia (seven).
5. Transport goods using clean energy
The transport of goods around the world is a hard-to-abate sector ­ meaning it is a technologically difficult sector to decarbonize ­ in the case of planes, ships and trucks. Railways are however easier, and there are more and more technologies available to help reduce GHG emissions from this part of the economy. With G20 accounting for 75% of the world's trade, it is important to note that there are calls to promote more sustainable and efficient trade24. Transportation sector is often trade-exposed and highly carbon intensive while concerned about losing its competitiveness towards countries with lower prices. Therefore, educating businesses and citizens about the benefits of common policy to scale up action collectively, and to build societal ownership in this effort is key to decarbonizing the sector. Figure 10. Public support for transporting goods with vehicles that run on clean energy
Among G20 countries, the use of clean energy in the transportation of goods was generally less popular than many other policies, with support among adults falling to just 31% in Saudi Arabia. Often people are less aware of the pollution caused by this sector, at least when compared with personal transportation. However, there was a high level of support among both under-18s and adults in Australia, Canada, and the United Kingdom, where 67% of adults support this policy, the highest of the G20 countries surveyed. There were also some marked differences between support among adults and under-18s in different countries. In Germany, support was fourteen percentage points higher among adults, for example, and in the United Kingdom, ten. Meanwhile in the United States, support was six percentage points higher among under-18s. In contrast, in Mexico, Russia, Brazil and Argentina, there was only a minimal difference in support between the two groups.
Cutting Emissions in Nature
Land-use change plays a crucial role in tackling the climate crisis. The land-use sector, such as forestry and agriculture, is responsible for just under a quarter of GHG emissions25. There needs to be efforts to mitigate climate change through land-use activities, such as through conserving and restoring forests.
1. Conservation of forests and land
In 2020, G20 members committed to a Global Initiative on Reducing Land Degradation and Enhancing Conservation of Terrestrial Habitats, with the aim of sharing knowledge and best practice on ways to protect, conserve and sustainably manage land.26 This is an important mitigation strategy for countries, and is reflected through projects such as REDD+, which advances forest protection27. This reflects majority support for the conservation of forests and land in G20 countries in sixteen out of eighteen G20 countries surveyed.
Figure 11. Public support for conservation of forests and land
In some countries, many more under-18s supported this policy than adults, for example Russia (69% vs. 60%), India (52% vs. 43%), Argentina (63% vs. 57%), France (77% vs. 73%) and the United States (73% vs. 69%). Protecting forests and land had the highest levels of support among adults in the United Kingdom (82%), Canada and Germany (both 79%). In some countries, significantly more adults than under-18s supported this policy, most strikingly by ten percentage points in the United Kingdom.
2. Support environmental stewards
G20 members are home to populations that are vulnerable to climate impacts, such as indigenous peoples, local communities and women, who may manage lands in ways that protect them from destruction. Through these actions emissions can be prevented, such as through stopping the release of carbon associated with deforestation. Often however these groups lack legal claims to their land, or they are excluded from decision-making. This means supporting these environmental stewards is an important step towards addressing the climate crisis. In recognition of this, and ahead of the Rome Summit, the G20 reiterated its support for ensuring local communities and indigenous populations are able to effectively participate in all relevant local decision-making28. Figure 12. Percentage approval for supporting indigenous peoples, local communities and women who are environmental stewards
Popular support for environmental stewards was relatively inconsistent among under-18s and adults, and between countries, likely driven by cultural and social differences. Support was highest among under-18s in Australia (64%) and adults in the United Kingdom (61%), and was relatively low in Saudi Arabia, India, and the Republic of Korea. The greatest differences were found in Germany, where adult support was eleven percentage points higher than among under-18s, and in Russia, where support was eight percentage points higher than among under-18s. The protection of land by environmental stewards is a global challenge, indicating a stronger effort at public education is required.
Adapting to Climate Change
The growth in human emissions over the last two centuries has contributed already to global heating of 1.1 °C. According to the IPCC, this warming trend will continue in coming decades and the world must take dramatic and urgent action to reduce emissions and avoid increasingly devastating impacts. In 2021, global temperature rise has already caused an increase in the frequency and severity of extreme weather events, including heating and cooling events, as well as floods, storm surges, and forest fires. These can cause deaths and injury, and damage crops and property. The world will have to invest large amounts of money and resources into adapting to climate change in order to cope more effectively with these impacts. However just 20% of climate finance today is directed towards climate change adaptation. Besides their own defenses, many G20 countries will need to fund adaptation in poorer countries, to prevent disastrous socio-economic impacts as well. What do the people think? The G20 Peoples' Climate Vote asked respondents whether they supported three different climate change adaptation policies.
1. Build up resilient infrastructure
The G20 Environment Ministers discussed how to increase resilience to climate change around the world through better infrastructure and nature conservation in 202129. However, the G20 Peoples' Climate Vote survey indicates that support for this as a policy is mixed. Figure 13. Public support building infrastructure and conserving nature to protect lives and livelihoods
There were high levels of support in half of the G20 countries surveyed, with majorities backing building more resilient infrastructure among both adults and under-18s. The majorities were significantly higher among adults than under-18s in Germany, Canada, the United Kingdom, the Republic of Korea, Japan and Italy. Only in the United States, Brazil, and Argentina was support for this policy higher among under-18s at a level that is statistically significant.
2. Early warning systems
Extreme weather events such as droughts, flooding, storms, and fires, are becoming more frequent and more intense around the world as a result of climate change. These can often be monitored, and warnings issued, giving people valuable time to make decisions about protecting themselves and their property. With the onset of climate change effects around the world, early warning systems are a key part of adaptation strategies and disaster risk reduction. G20 countries can coordinate and fund these systems, both at home and abroad. Figure 14. Public support for installing more early warning systems for disasters
Installing more early warning systems to support disaster preparedness received mixed levels of support. There were higher levels of support among under-18s than adults in all countries for which there is data, with the generational divide hitting eight percentage points in France and the United States.
3. Climate-friendly farming
The G20 members contain approximately 60% of the world's agricultural land and 80% of world trade in agricultural products30, putting them in a prime position to lead the way on reducing emissions in agriculture, which produces as much as a quarter of global emissions. In addition, the adaptation of farming techniques to the new climatic conditions is critical to securing the livelihoods of millions of farmers in the G20 countries, such as to delayed monsoon and drought in India31. The G20 reaffirmed its commitment to enhancing food security and sustainable agricultural systems in its September 2021 declaration32. Figure 15. Public support for climate-friendly farming
Only in Germany and the Republic of Korea was support higher, and statistically significant, among adults than under-18s for more climate-friendly farming. In turn, support for this policy was often higher among under-18s than adults. The United States saw the largest difference, with 72% of under-18s support climate-friendly farming, compared with just 60% of adults, and India, where 51% of under-18s support, compared with 43% of adults. This indicates a need for more education among adults on the benefits of climate-friendly farming.
4. Insurance as a climate adaptation policy
When extreme weather hits, the effects can be devastating to people and property. They can cause huge economic damage too. Insurance provides a means for families, businesses and communities to get back on their feet more quickly. And yet, much of the world does not even have access to affordable insurance services. Given the G20 countries make up around 60% of the world's population, they have a responsibility to ensure people have access to affordable insurance, to help protect lives and livelihoods. They can also encourage the provision of insurance services to countries beyond the G20. Government has an important role to play here, as insurance is often a heavily-regulated industry. Figure 16. Public support for providing good and affordable insurance
The results of the G20 Peoples' Climate Vote indicate a significant split between under-18s and adults on the merits of supporting access to insurance. In no country in the poll was there majority support among adults for this policy, and yet there were majorities among under-18s in the United States (61%), Canada (58%), Australia (57%), and the United Kingdom (53%). There were also large generational divides in different countries, for example, the United States (fourteen percentage points), Italy (twelve), Brazil, France and Japan (all eleven), Argentina (ten), and Australia, the Republic of Korea and Russia (all eight).
Methodology
While numerous surveys measure belief in climate change in developed countries, UNDP wanted to reach new audiences and poll countries where less was known about public opinion. Given UNDP's unique role in supporting 120 countries to develop their national pledges under the Paris Agreement through its flagship Climate Promise initiative, it also wanted to help governments to gauge public sentiment on specific policy solutions that could be at the heart of those national pledges.
The Peoples' Climate Vote involved two "big picture" questions followed by six policy questions where the respondent could select up to three preferences per question (18 total). For demographic information, respondents were asked to identify their gender from man, woman, or "X", their age as under-18, 18-35, 36-59, or 60+, and when they left their education.
The first two "big picture" questions asked the respondent if they thought climate change was a global emergency and, if so, the urgency of action required to address it. The second part of the survey asked respondents which of the 18 policies they favored to tackle climate change. The policy options were framed around six of the most impactful solution areas: energy, economy, transportation, farms and food, protecting people, and nature. The content draws from the Sustainable Development Goals, portfolio and approaches by the United Nations and UNDP, and analyses conducted by the IPCC and NASA, and NGOs such as Project Drawdown. The content was simplified to enable mass participation and reviewed by some of the world's leading experts on climate policy.
Survey Delivery
The Peoples' Climate Vote used an entirely new way of polling developed by UNDP and partners. The survey was distributed to people via advertising on mobile gaming networks. This meant invitations to participate popped up as adverts when people were playing the most popular mobile games. Nearly 4,000 apps were targeted including games that are popular internationally, such as Words with Friends, Angry Birds, Dragon City, Temple Run, or Subway Surfers, as well as those that are popular locally. Instead of seeing a traditional advert in their game, the player would be invited to participate in the Peoples' Climate Vote. The look and feel of the vote was developed as an inviting, fun, and playful way for people to send a message to world leaders.
The adverts were placed randomly and served only once to each individual by the mobile gaming advertising network. No personally identifiable information was collected by UNDP or any Mission 1.5 partner. With 16 million invitations issued in 18 G20 countries, the survey yielded over 689,000 responses, a response rate of 4.2% across the 18 countries. This report is based on analysis of respondents who answered all three demographic questions and at least the first question on climate change.
Processing
As there were more responses from some demographic groups than others, the raw "votes" from the survey were not representative of the population of any of the participating countries. An expert team from the University of Oxford weighted (or rebalanced) the data to generate estimates to be as representative as possible of the joint distribution of age, gender and education in each country. These more representative estimates can reveal much about public opinion in participating countries or groupings of countries. All crosscountry averages were population-weighted, and so these results are strongly influenced by larger countries such as India. For the first "big picture" question about the climate emergency, there are representative results for all 18 countries.
For current national population breakdowns by age and gender, the 2020 projected figures from the 2019 revision of the UN Department of Economic and Social Affairs' Population Division `World Population Prospects' report (United Nations Population Division 2019) were used. Estimates of the numbers of people for each level of education come from the 2020 projections from the Wittgenstein Centre for Demography and Global Human Capital (2018), using International Standard Classification of Education (ISCED) levels, for different combinations of age and gender within each country.
To reconcile the different measures of education from the Peoples' Climate Vote and the Wittgenstein Centre data, it was necessary to estimate the approximate level of education for each respondent using information on the age the respondent left education, and their actual age. The respondent was asked what year they left school and the following mapping was applied:
· Never attended school --> Never attended school (ISCED level 0) · Left school aged less than 12 --> Primary level education (ISCED level 1) · Left school aged 12 to 19 --> Secondary level education (ISCED levels 2 and 3) · Left education aged 20 or over --> Post-secondary level education (ISCED levels 4+) · Still in education and under 18 years of age --> Secondary level education (ISCED levels 2
and 3)
· Still in education and 18 years or older --> Post-secondary level education (ISCED levels 4+)
Overall population estimates are for the resident population of each country that is over 14 years old and identifies as either male or female. The survey did not ask respondents precisely how old respondents were. All those who were under age 18 were assumed to have been over 14. This means that the opinions of any respondents who were aged 14 or under are treated as if they were equivalent to those of 15-to 17-year-olds for the purposes of overall population weighting.
Those who said their gender was "X" (i.e., not identifying as male or female) are not included in the published estimates because the target demographic data from the UN and Wittgenstein data does not provide population estimates for the size of non-binary populations within each country. However, the attitudes to climate change of those giving gender as "X" within the Peoples' Climate Vote were very similar to those of respondents who identified as male or female.
In some countries, there were difficulties reaching enough people from more difficult-to-reach sub-populations, typically older groups and those with only primary or no formal education.
To ensure the integrity of published estimates, sampling targets were generated for all possible combinations of age group, gender, and education level, based on the groups used for weighting. It was expected that the survey would elicit responses from a minimum target number for each such age-gender-education combination. Those minimum targets were based on a perfectly representative sample of 2,000 people from a given country.
For any given survey question, no overall estimates of public opinion for a country are published unless the numbers of respondents answering that question and all three demographic questions meet all the age-gender-education sampling targets within 30% or within 20 people, or there are at least 35 respondents for any given age-gender-education combination. The latter criterion implies some large weighting in certain instances, but the response distributions are sufficiently regular that the weighting makes relatively little difference to the overall figures. These conditions were not met for the policy questions for Indonesia and South Africa.
Where those conditions were met and overall estimates are published for a question, estimates for sub-populations (defined by age or gender or education level) are also published if there is an adequate number of respondents for the estimates to be a reliable guide to how that group differs from the overall population. For this, the number of respondents was at least 250. Also, we do not publish figures for very small groups: ones that constitute less than 3% of the population aged over 14.
In some countries, adequate samples of sub-populations were achieved even though the requirements for publishing overall population estimates were not met. For these, estimates of the response distribution for a question for a particular demographic group are published if all the sampling targets have been met within that group and the total number of respondents is at least 500. This means, for instance, that some countries have published estimates of opinion on certain questions for, say, under 18-year-olds, if there are sufficient numbers of them for each combination of gender and education based on the sampling targets. This applies for under-18s in Indonesia and South Africa for the policy questions, where the data are not adequate to publish figures for those 18 and over.
The margin of error for percentages quoted in this report will technically vary according to the sample size for the particular question, country and group being discussed. As a general rule for the country-level data, margins of error are no larger than + or - two percentage points. For differences between countries, or genders, gaps of five points or more are significant.66
Some of the respondents who answered the initial questions (about belief in a climate emergency and preferences for speed of global action) did not go on to answer further questions about their views on which climate policies their country should pursue. Those who answered the policy questions were somewhat more likely, than those who did not, to have said in the initial questions that they believed in a climate emergency and that the world should do everything necessary about it. Some of this attrition is already accounted for by the fact that the data is weighted for the joint age-gender-education distribution separately for each climate question. If there were further adjustment for the pattern of attrition, support for the policy options would be no more than one to three points lower than published.
Country groupings
In this report, the term country, used interchangeably with government, state or economy, does not imply political independence but refers to any territory for which authorities report separate social or economic statistics.
UNDP, together with the UN system, mobilizes international support and advocates for ambitious climate action. With regard to the analysis and results of the Peoples' Climate Vote, we have attempted to provide insights across various groups including economic classification.
Comparing adults and under-18s
In this report, we specifically looked at how under-18s and adults supported climate policies. To do this, we calculated averages of under-18 support per policy per country, and also the average for the 18+ bracket.
The under-18s group was weighted to the education*gender profile of the 15, 16 and 17 year old population in each country.
Where differences between adults and under-18s were noted, this was based on the response after rounding. For example, if 54.93% of adults and 57.21% of under-18s supported one policy, this was rounded to 55% and 57%. The difference between adults and under-18s was therefore taken to be 3% (not 2.28%).
