 Monday, April 27, 2009 469 mots

ADB warns of Asian climate change disaster
By John Aglionby in Jakarta

The economic impact of climate change on four of south-east Asia's biggest nations will be 2.5 times more severe than the global average by 2100 if carbon emissions continue at their current level, the Asian Development Bank is warning in a new study.

Annual losses incurred by Indonesia, the Philippines, Thailand and Vietnam are predicted to be $230bn, or 6.68 per cent of their combined economic output, according to the regional development bank. This compares with a global mean prediction of 2.6 per cent.

The four countries are likely to be hit so hard because they have long coastlines, largely agrarian economies and are experiencing rampant deforestation. They will thus be more at risk from rising sea levels, higher temperatures, falling agricultural yields and more frequent extreme weather events.

Juzhong Zhuang, the ADB's assistant chief economist, said such a disastrous scenario can be averted if Asian countries start acting now and in concert to adapting to the impacts of climate change and transitioning into low-carbon economies.

"But if a specific country wants to pro-actively adapt to climate change it can't be done alone," he said. "They need regional level activity and it is needed now. If the action is delayed then south-east Asia will suffer much more than most other regions of the world."

Mr Zhuang said the ADB conducted the study, the first of its kind for Asia, to raise awareness about the need for action now. "What's needed is better government policy, better coordination between agencies and between central and local government, and better research by all countries.

The annual economic losses are broken down into market losses, such as lower crop yields, non-market losses such as increased healthcare costs and community relocation, and risk of catastrophe due to more frequent severe weather events.

By 2100 these will be, respectively, $70bn, $120bn and $34bn. They were calculated using similar techniques as the influential 2006 Stern Review commissioned by the British government.

One example of the economic losses would be as a result of changing water flow patterns in the Mekong River. The study quotes research that estimates in the river basin the maximum monthly flow could increase by 41 per cent and the minimum monthly flow fall by 24 per cent. This would result in increased flooding in the wet season and greater likelihood of water shortages in the dry season.

Land use change, and particularly deforestation, currently accounts for 75 per cent of south-east Asia's emissions. Experts say that these should be relatively easy to reduce if there is sufficient political will.

Fitrian Ardiansyah, a Jakarta-based climate change specialist with World Wildlife Fund warned that at the governments' current rate of progress the worst-case scenario cannot be ruled out. "I believe the governments do understand what climate change is but that's different to knowing what to do about it, let alone actually doing it," he said. "They need to mainstream both adaptation and mitigation into their regular development plans."

Disseminating the need for action and what should be done to regional administrations is also proving difficult. "The speed of the process is not as fast as the speed of the impacts of climate change on the people," Mr Fitrian said.

The ADB is highlighting places like the Philippine province of Albay as an example of best-case practice. It is pioneering a prototype for local climate change adaptation that aims to embed disaster risk reduction into all policies and to enforce climate-proofing and disaster-proofing practices.
