 COMMENT, Friday, December 12, 2008 855 mots, p. 9

Global warming: the way not to mobilise the masses

I sometimes feel sorry for politicians. The other day, Ed Miliband, Britain's bright young energy and climate minister, urged concerned citizens to stiffen the sinews of their political masters in the fight against global warming. With exquisite timing a bunch of climate change activists promptly set up camp on the runway of London's Stansted airport, stirring the wrath of thousands of delayed air travellers. We can assume that this was not the sort of public-spirited action the minister had had in mind when he told The Guardian newspaper that "popular mobilisation" would empower politicians to take the hard decisions needed to create a low-carbon global economy.

The trouble is, as the angry passengers at Stansted would have told him, mobilisation in the cause of greenery is not invariably popular. With the recession biting, it is about to get less so. Faced with threats to their jobs and homes, voters are disinclined to worry about global temperatures half a century hence.

The parallels Mr Miliband had in mind - the Make Poverty History campaign or, farther back, the anti-apartheid and equality movements - might have been more compelling during the boom times. Doing good is easier when you are feeling good. Now, though, people power is more likely to be on the side of delay at best, denial at worst.

You can see these forces at work in the European Union. Europe has not had much to boast about these past few years, even if Nicolas Sarkozy, the energetic French president, has lately given it a profile in global affairs. That said, the EU has been in the vanguard of the campaign to clean up the atmosphere.

The EU leaders have set a target of cutting greenhouse emissions in the EU by 20 per cent by 2020. They have pledged to increase energy efficiency by 20 per cent and to draw 20 per cent of energy from renewable sources. There must be something special about the number 20.

All this seemed challenging, but possible at a time of prosperity. The voters would surely accept a degree of pain to safeguard the future for their children and grandchildren. Industry had the cash (or cheap credit lines from the banks) to adjust.

No longer. European businesses, denied funds from a frozen banking system and facing collapse in consumer demand, want EU leaders at today's Brussels summit to dilute the package. Italy and Germany have been demanding free permits for their manufacturing companies in a revised EU emissions trading scheme. The former communist states want extra compensation to clean up Soviet-era coal-fired power stations.

Mr Miliband has his own experience of such pressures. Britain has the tightest legal framework of any European state to make sure it meets its targets. But the Treasury, Whitehall's most powerful department, is openly scornful of "greenery", especially when it threatens its monopoly control of taxation and spending. It recently vetoed an eminently sensible plan to install energy-saving gas and electricity meters in every household as part of an economic stimulus plan.

Britain's energy minister also faces some tough calls on whether to approve construction of new (and dirty) coal-fired power stations. Mr Miliband's instincts are said to lie with those who say that all new permissions must carry an obligation to retro-fit the stations with carbon capture technology. But Gordon Brown, Mr Miliband's boss, has been heard to mutter that he is paying too much attention to CO2 emissions and not enough to energy security.

Such conflicts are inevitable - and trivial against the task of securing a global pact to reduce greenhouse gases to a sustainable level. If British government departments cannot agree between themselves, many will ask what hope is there of persuading China and India to clean up their act?

European diplomats tell me that the circle will be squared at today's summit and the Union will emerge with something resembling a plausible strategy to achieve its ambitious targets. We shall see. If nothing else, the leaders should know that their credibility with Barack Obama's new administration in Washington will be shredded if they do not reach a deal.

The debate has exposed the broader problem. Much as I sympathise with the suggestion that people power will be essential in the effort to slow, and eventually, halt global warming, governments cannot allow the climate change argument to be framed either by self-interested businesses or by well-intentioned activists.

The young campaigners at Stansted had a point. There is something odd about the British government's twin commitments to lower carbon emissions and to promoting a headlong expansion of London's several airports. But like most other such groups, the protesters seemed concerned only with sacrifice.

In this mindset saving the planet demands that people give up their foreign holidays, abandon their cars, turn down the heating and clean their teeth in the dark. Through this prism, pain is a virtue and the halting global warming metamorphoses into a much broader attack on consumerism, materialism and, at the extreme, anything that smacks of the market.

Whatever one makes of the intent, such zealotry is doomed to failure. Self-flagellation does not sell. If keeping the planet cool is seen to be the project of affluent middle-class do-gooders the masses will mobilise all right - against it.

The case must be framed as an opportunity rather than a burden. Technological innovation - in automobile design, energy efficiency, renewable energy and the rest - is more than a useful adjunct to an austere low carbon lifestyle. It is a vital pillar of any plan to reduce the build-up of CO2. Bluntly stated, unless we find a way to capture emissions from coal-fired power stations, the game will be lost.

The response of politicians must be to accentuate the opportunities: in business, jobs and technological advance in rich economies; in fostering security in poorer regions; and in binding the rising powers into an equitable international system.

Mr Obama makes the case that less gas guzzling will enhance America's security by reducing dependence on unreliable or hostile foreign regimes. A glance towards Moscow should carry the same message for Europeans.

Instead of talking about the cost of doing something, leaders would do better to emphasise the price of doing nothing. Of course, the shift to a low carbon economy will not be painless. But nor is global warming. The way to mobilise the masses is to recast the argument. Opportunity sells a lot better than do hair shirts.

