Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, April 6, 2010ENERGY SECURITY IS NOT A LUXURY BUT A NECESSITY IN A DANGEROUS WORLDMalcolm Wicks Personal viewT the London celebration of the Langeled Pipeline in 2006, heralding the supply of Norwegian gas to the UK, Prime Minister, Tony Blair, speculated that in the future, "energy security will be almost as important as defence".Certainly during my time as energy minister it was energy supply that played on my mind. I therefore welcomed Gordon Brown's invitation to mount an enquiry and publish a report on energy security [Energy Security: a national challenge in a changing world, August 2009]. My report made many recommendations, to which the Government made a serious response last week.Why do we now need an urgent focus on security, alongside the priority of climate change? The answer is given by the risky coincidence of two substantial developments. First, Britain is now experiencing a decade or more of rapid transition towards import dependency. Gas is critical. From recent North Sea self-sufficiency, we now import about 25pc of our requirement. And by 2020, it could well be around 70pc.Second, this radical transition occurs when, post-recession, there will be an enormous global thirst for energy. The International Energy Agency estimates that up to 2030 global demand could increase by as much as 40pc (although only half that amount if climate change measures are pursued vigorously). Strong nations will flex economic, political and, perhaps, military muscle in the pursuit of fuel to power their economies.Fewer fossil fuels are being produced in Europe and there will be more reliance on the Middle East in particular, but also on both Russia and Africa. For the European Union (but not the UK directly) Russia is crucial, supplying some 40pc of European gas demand, with the potential for this figure to rise.Such developments occur at a time of substantial investment risk. The recession has hit investment and this could mean tight energy supplies when economies recover. The IEA has estimated that over $5 trillion (GBP3.3 trillion) of investment is required in the oil sector and $3.3 trillion for gas. Output from existing oil-fields is depleting. Additional production equivalent to four Saudi Arabias will be needed to maintain oil supplies at existing levels and six Saudi Arabias to reach the increase in demand towards 2030.By 2025 the UK could be importing some 50pc of its total energy. Very different from the 1950s when coal was king and 700,000 miners were employed in 900 British pits. Different too from the heyday of the North Sea.In my report I call for action internationally but also on the home front. Energy efficiency must be the starting point. This must not be regarded as some kind of soft option but rather as a rigorous programme to reduce the country's demand for energy.Reduced demand must be matched by maximising 'home grown' energy. The Government has committed itself to increase renewables to 15pc of total energy by 2020.Should the UK be more ambitious on nuclear power? I believe the answer is yes. In recent times nuclear has provided some 15pc of our electricity requirement but it was over 25pc in the 1990s. The proportion will decline in coming years when old generators are decommissioned. By the early 2020s we could have the same proportion of nuclear in our mix as now. Should we go further? If we electrify much of our transport and heating, our demand for electricity in 2050 could be 50pc higher than it is today. A range between, say, 35pc-40pc of electricity from nuclear could be a sensible aspiration beyond 2030. This might seem ambitious, but compares with France's 80pc of electricity coming from nuclear.Diversity of supply is vital and that means a role for coal. Carbon capture and storage (CCS) could enable new coal plants to be part of the low carbon economy. It is also important to pursue new coal technologies, such as underground coal gasification.Gas will remain important for the foreseeable future. The Government therefore needs to take steps to satisfy itself that gas supply is secure. It would be advantageous to the security of our gas supplies if long-term, fixed volume contracts were in place. The UK also requires more gas storage as stocks from our natural 'store', the North Sea decline.There are welcome plans for more commercial storage, but gas stored in this way will be sold to the highest bidder, and often used to supply continental demands. Government either needs to ensure that proportions of commercially stored gas are available just for the UK market in extreme circumstances, or should consider seriously the option of investing in strategic gas storage.Malcolm Wicks is MP for Croydon North. Between 2005-6 and 2007-8 he was energy minister. In October 2008 he was appointed the Prime Minister's special representative on international energy.Comment on Malcolm Wicks' view at " telegraph.co.uk/finance" If we electrify our transport, electricity demand could be 50pc higher "