Telegraph (London, UK) Friday, May 7, 2010PARTIES AGREE ON GREEN POLICIES BUT WHICH ONE WILL DELIVER ON PLEADGES?Louise GrayCLIMATE change is likely to be a defining issue of the next Parliament, but it was rarely mentioned during the election campaign.The reason for this is that most of the main parties' policies on how to tackle it are the same.All three want to make homes more efficient, generate more energy from renewable sources and increase recycling. Most importantly, they all agree that global warming is man-made and Britain should be part of an international deal to cut carbon emissions.With environment groups warning that global warming must be stopped within five years, the question is which party means what it says.The Liberal Democrats have the greenest policies of the three main parties. Nick Clegg made the most of this during the leaders' debates, using his party's radical environmental policies to distance himself from "old politics".He promised to go beyond current climate change targets and cut Britain's greenhouse gases to zero by 2050. He said this could be done through insulating leaky building stock, building a high-speed rail network and curbing emissions from aviation and manufacturing. He said offshore wind, solar and other renewables could provide all the country's energy needs without having to resort to nuclear power.Labour and the Tories claim it will be impossible to keep the lights on without nuclear, although both say that no public subsidies will be offered.Labour set out plans for up to 10 new nuclear power stations and promised to continue with plans to build thousands of wind turbines on land and at sea.Ed Miliband, the Climate Change Secretary, said the Tories would put this at risk by shaking up the planning system.He said only Labour would keep Britain on track to a low carbon economy, despite the fact that most of his hardfought policies on renewables - such as setting up a green investment bank - were repeated by other parties.The Tories matched Labour on green policies, although many of the details were different.The party promised loans to help people insulate their homes and to invest in renewables, although they are more cautious about onshore wind.But despite managing to largely "decontaminate" his party of climate sceptics, David Cameron was largely quiet on green issues.The nationalist parties in Scotland and Wales have some of the most ambitious plans for renewable energy, while the Green Party was hoping to get its first MP in Brighton.Environmental groups remain hopeful that all the parties will stick to the ambitious green policies in their manifestos, arguing that many of the measures to boost renewables and insulate homes will provide jobs and help the economy.