Telegraph (London, UK) Friday, November 12, 2010WORLD IS FACING FISH AND FRESH WATER CRISES, SAYS PRINCEDaily Telegraph ReporterTHE Prince of Wales has warned European business leaders of the consequences of climate change, suggesting its effects would be more devastating than the recession.The Prince also highlighted specific environmental issues, warning that the collapse of threatened fish stocks would be "catastrophic" for billions of people, and that the planet only had a "finite" fresh water supply.His comments were made last night during an address at St James's Palace to leading executives before a business conference organised by KPMG.The Prince said that if society failed to see the risk it faced by "over-utilising the world's natural capital" serious problems would be encountered in the future. "We will see much more economic disruption and much more human deprivation and misery than we did after the bankruptcy of Lehman Brothers on Sept 15 2008."The Prince has made a number of speeches about the problems facing the planet, from climate change to other issues, such as the felling of the rainforests.He has also set out his views on how to live sustainably in his book Harmony, co-written with Tony Juniper, the leading environmentalist and Ian Skelly, the broadcaster.The Prince also spoke about the problems caused by unsustainable agriculture, claiming that "a staggering 35 tons of fresh water is needed to make a single ton of artifi-cial fertiliser".He added: "It is worth, perhaps, remembering that the total amount of water circulating throughout the world is in fact finite and yet, at the same time, there are currently one billion people who are chronically undernourished, who live on less than a dollar a day and who have no access to any clean water whatsoever."Directing his attention to global fish stocks, the Prince said: "The impact of the collapse of fish stocks on the 200million people employed in the world's fisheries and on the billions of people who depend upon fish as a major source of their dietary protein will be catastrophic. And bearing in mind the way we are going, this will happen."