Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, May 26, 2010MELTING ICE IS MAKING IT MORE RISKY TO TACKLE EVERESTHeidi BlakeEVEREST is becoming increasingly dangerous to climb because global warming is melting glacier ice along its slopes, claims a sherpa who has conquered the mountain 20 times.Rising temperatures have melted much of the ice on the climb to the summit and mountaineers are struggling to get traction on the exposed rock surface, according to the 49-year-old sherpa, known only as Apa.The melting ice has also exposed deep crevasses into which climbers could fall.Experts have warned that people scaling the mountain risk being swept away by "outburst floods" from the rising volumes of glacial meltwater.Apa, who grew up in the foothills of Everest, reached the 29,035ft summit on Saturday for the 20th time, breaking his previous record of 19 ascents.After returning to Kathmandu yesterday, he said: "The rising temperature on the mountains has melted much ice and snow on the trail to the summit."It is difficult for climbers to use their crampons on the rocky surfaces."He said there was hardly any exposed rock on the trail to the summit when he first climbed Everest in 1989.However, the slopes are now dotted with bare rocks.The world's highest mountain is becoming an increasingly popular tourist destination, with a procession of novice climbers scaling the summit with the help of highly expert sherpas, such as Apa.Bonita Norris, a 22-year-old media studies graduate from Berkshire, recently became the youngest British woman to conquer Everest.She admitted that she had never even climbed Snowdon, the highest peak in Wales, before setting her sights on the world's highest summit.However, expert mountaineers have warned that many amateur climbers may not be aware of the risks they face in tackling Everest.A report by scientists at University College London said the Himalayan glaciers were retreating faster than many others around the world, at rates ranging from 32 ft to 196ft each year.Prof Steve Edwards, an earth scientist who coauthored the report, titled The Waters of the Third Pole, said the effects of glacial melting posed a real risk to climbers."The general trend shows that the Himalayan glaciers as a whole are melting faster than many others. It is probably the fastest rate of melting in the world," he said."The result is that in the summer months there is going to be a lot of slush on the ice fields."There is also the risk of glacial outburst floods, where the meltwater tops the bank of sediment left behind by the glacier during a period of intense melting and crashes down the river valley, destroying everything in its path."The United Nations climate change panel warned in 2007 that the Himalayan glaciers were melting so fast that they would almost completely disappear by 2035.The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change admitted that the claim was an exaggeration earlier this year, but melting ice in the mountain range remains a source of grave concern.Lewis Gordon Pugh, the British environmentalist, swam 1km (1,093 yards) across a lake of meltwater on Everest at the weekend to highlight the speed at which the ice is melting.