Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, October 5, 2010EUROPE UNVEILS ACTION PLANSJohn Prosser"Europe needs to think about developing renewables, not just in terms of climate change but also as just plain and simple selfinterest in competitive global markets." So said Philip Lowe, European Commission Director General for Energy, at a recent Friends of Europe debate. He may have been stating the obvious, but there are certainly strong commercial reasons for advancing renewable energy sources as rapidly as possible among the countries of the European Union.The EU countries are global leaders in the development and application of renewable energy, vital for both reducing the EU's dependence on external energy imports, and in meeting targets to combat adverse global climate change. While Germany and the United Kingdom may currently be the only members of the EU on track to achieve the objectives set by the Kyoto Protocol on climate change, the recent delivery by the majority of the EU nations of their renewable energy action plans, under the Renewable Energy Directive, is at least another step in the right direction.The directive required each European member state to provide a national renewable energy action plan by 30 June 2010. Only two plans had arrived on the European Commission's desk by noon on deadline day, though most of the 27 members have now submitted their plans. So far, all the documents published highlight plans for significant increases in renewable energy capacity, primarily but not exclusively built around the rapid expansion of onshore and offshore wind farms.Germany is forecast to increase its onshore wind capacity by 30 per cent over the next decade, while onshore wind capacity will grow by 130 per cent in Ireland, 230 per cent in Italy and 74 per cent in Spain. Offshore wind capacity is expected to grow from close to zero to around 10,OOOMW for Germany, 2,300MW for Ireland, 1,OOOMW for Italy and 3,OOOMW for Spain. Solar power is also expected to rise almost 3,000 per cent in Spain and a massive 500 per cent in Italy with Eastern European states such as Poland and Bulgaria reported to be planning a significant increase in biomass.The European Renewable Energy Council (EREC) has welcomed the plans, saying that the 20 per cent target was technically feasible and would provide a significant boost to the European economy in terms of revenue and job creation. "EREC is convinced that member states recognise the benefits of ambitious renewables policies, enabling a fast-growing industry to make the necessary investments to maintain the EU's global leadership and create new jobs," saidEREC policy advisor Lucie Tesniere. "EREC firmly believes that the EU 27 can reach at least 20 per cent by 2020 - domestic action will bring domestic benefits for European companies, citizens and society at large." The UK's Coalition Government has published its submission to the European Commission setting out how the UK plans to meet its 15 per cent renewable energy target.But while it says it is confident it can meet its target for 2020 with a threepoint framework of action, it admits it has to "radically increase" its use of renewable energy as it describes climate change as "one of the gravest threats we face". The 'lead scenario' set out in the UK plan indicates that it is possible to achieve the 15 per cent target and provides one technological combination for 2020.But this scenario does not represent a target for any particular sector or technology and is not seen as an upper limit to the UK's ambition for renewables deployment. The action plan re-affirmed the UK's current position with renewable energy, saying, "the UK has been blessed with a wealth of energy resources. Until now we have relied on the use of our coal, oil and gas supplies to supply our homes; support our businesses; and power our transport. As we look forward, we need to ensure that we also make the most of our renewable resources to provide a secure basis for the UK's future energy needs." The report says that the total renewable capacity of the UK will be 38.21GW, made up of the clean technology applications and highlights three key areas as the basis for UK renewables policy: _ financial support for renewables _ unblocking barriers to delivery _ developing emerging technologies The report adds: "Offshore wind is a key area for development. We will work to develop an offshore electricity grid to support our continuing commitment to being world leaders in this technology. This credit: JOHN THYS/AFP/Getty Images new generation of offshore wind power will play a key role in meeting our 2020 target." The report also includes plans for a Green Investment Bank, an extended feed-in tariff scheme for renewable electricity, and reforms to the planning system. But Gaynor Hartnell, CEO of the Renewable EnergyAssociation, highlighted a number of questions, saying: "There are still many questions hanging hi the air - can new power projects move ahead in confidence that their revenue streams won't be undermined by a move to feed in tariffs? Can businesses start planning for the introduction of a renewable heat policy next April? Will new homes have to be zero carbon by 2016? The industry needs to know, and soon." And there are economic, political and administrative constraints.Adam Brown, senior energy analyst at the International Energy Agency, says the world is spending just half of the money necessary to meet climate goals. Global investments to achieve the climate goal should be $239 billion per annum to 2030. But current spending is around $110 billion. Dow Coming's Eric Peeters argues that a major obstacle to the development of photovoltaic power lies hi administrative barriers with the acquisition of permits causing delay in certain areas. Nevertheless, in spite of the questions, there is evidence of optimism that real progress can now be made. This, at least, is a breath of fresh air."'Will new homes have to be zero carbon by 2016? The industry needs to know, and soon'