Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, April 27, 2010A TREE FOR EVERY CHILD: HOW TORIES AIM TO WIN GREEN VOTELouise Gray Environment CorrespondentDAVID CAMERON has attempted to regain the green vote with a pledge to start a "low-carbon revolution" and plant a tree for every child born in England.Despite rebranding the party as environmentally friendly and advertisements urging "vote blue, go green", the Conservatives have been largely silent on the issue during the election campaign. In the television debate last week, Mr Cameron was the only leader not to mention climate change in his opening speech.Some Conservative Party members have denied that global warming is man-made. A recent poll found that climate change was at the bottom of the list of priorities for many Tory candidates.Yesterday, Mr Cameron published a series of commitments in a new "green manifesto". He promised to create a green deal that would give every home owner access to GBP6,500 for energy improvement measures. By 2016 there would be smart meters in every home. Transport would be transformed by a high-speed rail network and charging points for electric cars. The green belt would be protected and new "wildlife corridors" would connect nature reserves. Money from the sale of 1.5 per cent of the public woodlands estate would help to plant one million trees over the next parliament, including one for every child born in England from 2013.The Tory leader made it clear that voting for the Liberal Democrats would jeopardise a change in environmental policy, as it could mean that Labour would still be in power."If you vote Conservative you know you'll get every single word in here in terms of our green manifesto - you'll get all that done," he said. "You vote for anyone else, you can't be certain of any change."The Tories promised to adhere to the European target to generate 15 per cent of energy from renewables by 2020, by setting up a green investment bank and a marine energy park for offshore wind, wave and tidal power.Ed Miliband, the Energy and Climate Change Secretary, said many of the measures promised by the Tories - such as a pledge to pay people for generating their own electricity - had already been introduced.He criticised Mr Cameron for talking about climate change while members of his own party blocked applications for onshore wind farms. Darren Johnson, one of the three Green Party candidates with a good chance of being elected for the first time, said all the main parties were failing on the environment.