Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, May 29, 2010ROYAL SOCIETY BOWS TO CLIMATE CHANGE SCEPTICSLouise Gray Environment CorrespondentTHE Royal Society is to revise its official documentation on climate change to better reflect scientific scepticism about man-made global warming.The national academy of sciences has decided to act after a number of its Fellows complained that doubts over climate change were not being communicated to the public.The society has published a number of papers on global warming, but will now issue a new guide to summarise the arguments.Lord Rees of Ludlow, the society's president, accepted that the case for man-made global warming had been exaggerated in the past.He emphasised that the basic science remained sound but had agreed to issue new official guidance to reflect uncertainties. "Climate change is a hugely important issue but the public debate has all too often been clouded by exaggeration and misleading information," he said."We aim to provide the public with a clear indication of what is known about the climate system, what we think we know about it and, just as importantly, the aspects we still do not understand very well."In recent months the debate about global warming has been marred by scandal. Emails stolen from the University of East Anglia appeared to show that scientists were willing to manipulate data to exaggerate warming. The individuals involved were cleared of wrongdoing but the "climategate" disclosures knocked public confidence.At the same time, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which advises the United Nations, was criticised after wrongly claiming that the Himalayan glaciers could melt by 2035.Complaints were made by 43 Royal Society Fellows that its guidance did not reflect uncertainty among some in the scientific community.They were said to be particularly unhappy with one document, Climate Change Consensus, which defended mainstream science from the arguments of the sceptics.Lord Rees said the new guide had been planned for some time but was given "added impetus by concerns raised by a small group of fellows"."Nothing in recent developments has changed or weakened the underpinning science of climate change," he said. "In the current environment we believe this new guide will be very timely. Lots of people are asking questions.Indeed, even within the Fellowship of the Society there are differing views. Our guide will be based on expert views backed up by sound scientific evidence."He denied accusations that the national academy of sciences had ever stifled debate or that the case for man-made global warming was in doubt.Benny Peiser, the director of the Global Warming Policy Foundation, a think-tank, said it was time the sceptics were taken more seriously."I think it is a very significant development in that it is no longer one or two eccentrics but a wide group of Fellows so it is taken more seriously, as it should be," he said.43 Number of Royal Society Fellows who complained that its guidance on global warming needed revising