The Guardian (UK) Sunday, November 29, 2015 - 18:54 UTC -0500Protesters gather around the world for a strong climate change dealHundreds of thousands of people around the world, from Sydney to New York, marched on Sunday to call on world leaders meeting in Paris to agree a strong climate change deal.In Paris, pairs of shoes given by Pope Francis and Ban Ki-moon were among a collection set out in the Place de la République to represent those who were unable to march due to a ban by the French authorities in the aftermath of 13 November terror attacks. People lit candles, sang songs and wandered around the shoes, many of which were later given to a charity for distributing to homeless people.“It’s an incredible monument to the voices that have been silenced but also to that hope for action that comes out of this city,” said Emma Ruby-Sachs, acting executive director at Avaaz, which helped organise the shoe campaign.A peaceful “human chain” formed in central Paris from thousands of people including children holding placards reading “climatejustice” and “keep it [fossil fuels] in the ground”.The atmosphere turned ugly when a group of anti-capitalists and anarchists began throwing shoes and letting off loud bangs thought to be fireworks, leading to clashes with police. Riot police were deployed and teargas was used to disperse the unauthorised protest, which resulted in some 200 arrests.“It is more against capitalism [than a call for climate action],” said one of the protesters, who appeared to have hijacked the peaceful event by climate activists.In London, an audience of thousands braved 40mph gusts, dressed as polar bears, holding aloft solar panels and lying on the ground in “die-ins” to highlight the impact of global warming in the developing world. Organisers said more than 50,000 people had turned out.The Labour leader, Jeremy Corbyn, addressed the march, accompanied by the shadow chancellor, John McDonnell, and two other shadow ministers.“Those who are sitting around the tables in Paris have an enormous opportunity in front of them. Do not let them flake it or fool us,” Corbyn told an audience of thousands on Park Lane.The Green party MP, Caroline Lucas, said: “David Cameron is taking a wrecking ball to environmental policy.”A group of Sámi, an indigenous people of Sweden who say their way of life is threatened by climate change, sang on stage in London, in between a series of speeches by environmentalists.Craig Bennett, chief executive of Friends of the Earth, told the marchers: “This is a fantastic display of people power with thousands taking to the streets to demand urgent action on climate change.”More than 2,200 marches were scheduled around the world, with events in locations ranging from Madrid and Rome, which saw 20,000 people each on their streets, to Benin and Sana’a in Yemen, where about 70 people gathered and held up a banner despite air raids, nearby.In Copenhagen, where the last UN climate summit ended in failure in 2009, people marched saying they hoped for “better results” in Paris.Organisers in Australia and New Zealand said that marches there broke records, with more than 40,000 sweltering in Sydney’s heat and at least 3,000 people gathering in Canberra. Marches also took place in Melbourne and other cities.Archbishop Desmond Tutu, who has previously called for companies to divest from fossil fuels, said that if the world carried on as usual after the Paris talks, it might not get another opportunity to stave off dangerous global warming.“Should they develop a legally binding treaty, it will signal the end of the age of reckless consumption, exploitation and greed.”