The New York Times Late Edition - FinalBusiness/Financial, Thursday, January 21, 2016, p. B 4California Said to Target Exxon in Climate InquiryBy JOHN SCHWARTZCalifornia's attorney general is investigating Exxon Mobil on whether the company lied to the public and shareholders about the risks of climate change, and whether the company's statements over the years constitute violations of securities laws and other statutes.The investigation is similar to one started in November by the New York attorney general, Eric T. Schneiderman, for which the company has already produced thousands of documents.Mr. Schneiderman, calling climate change "the defining issue of our time," applauded the action taken by Kamala D. Harris, the attorney general."Just like any other publicly traded company, these energy giants have an obligation to ensure that their disclosures to investors of known and reasonably likely risks are truthful and not misleading, and to disclose to the public the risks associated with their products," he said.The California investigation was first reported by The Los Angeles Times, and was confirmed by people with knowledge of details of the inquiry.A spokeswoman for Ms. Harris, Rachele Huennekens, said in an email, "I can't confirm or deny any potential or ongoing investigation."Alan Jeffers, a spokesman for Exxon, did not confirm the existence of the California investigation, but he denied that the company had covered up climate risks."Exxon Mobil has included information about the business risk of climate change for many years in our 10-K, Corporate Citizenship Report and in other reports to shareholders," he said in an email response to questions.The call for an investigation of Exxon Mobil and other fossil fuel companies follows a number of news reports that cast a harsh spotlight on the companies' activities.In February, several news organizations, including The New York Times, reported that a Smithsonian researcher who had published papers questioning established climate science, Wei-Hock Soon, had received extensive funds from fossil fuel companies, including Exxon Mobil, without disclosing them.Since then, Inside Climate News and The Los Angeles Times published articles highlighting Exxon Mobil research into the risks of climate change. The company incorporated the research into its planning, even though it funded groups from the 1990s to the mid-2000s that denied serious climate risks.Mr. Jeffers of Exxon Mobil called accusations of a cover-up "inaccurate distortions of Exxon Mobil's nearly 40-year history of climate research that was conducted publicly in conjunction with the Department of Energy, academics and the U.N. Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change."He said "activists and media cherry-picked statements attributed to various company employees to wrongly suggest definitive conclusions were reached by company researchers at the early stages of scientific investigation of the potential for climate change."In recent years, the company has publicly stated that it accepts the science of climate change and that it has stepped away from organizations that undercut the overwhelming scientific evidence underlying it. The company has also said that it supports a tax on emissions as a way to further reduce climate risks.Calls for investigation have grown. Last week, the Los Angeles County Democratic Party adopted a resolution calling on Ms. Harris to pursue an investigation.News of the investigation was greeted enthusiastically by Representative Ted W. Lieu, a Democrat who represents parts of Los Angeles county and who called in November for investigations of Exxon Mobil by the Department of Justice and the Securities and Exchange Commission.Mr. Lieu, a former securities lawyer, said, "In America, because of the First Amendment, corporations get to lie to the American people. But if they lie to their shareholders or investors, that's a crime."He added, "Companies that have omitted far less damaging facts than Exxon Mobil have been prosecuted by the federal Securities and Exchange Commission, as well as state attorneys general."He also suggested that the Department of Justice could, as it did in its fight against the tobacco industry, pursue racketeering charges. Success on any of those legal tracks, however, is far from certain.On Wednesday, Mr. Lieu and fellow California Congressman Mark DeSaulnier sent a letter to Ms. Harris encouraging her to "leverage your authorities" as attorney general "to actively investigate this important and troubling issue."The letter referred to the New York inquiry, and stated, "While it remains to be determined whether Exxon Mobil's actions violated state law, your office is in a unique position to request the information necessary to make these determinations."The two lawmakers expressed the hope that Ms. Harris's actions would spur other state officials and regulators to investigate the company as well, and said that they would add their efforts in Washington, where they said they are requesting that the committee on oversight and government reform conduct hearings.In an interview, Mr. Lieu acknowledged that under current leadership in the House of Representatives, getting such a request granted would be "hard." But, he said, "If you don't ask, you don't know. Everything is impossible until it happens."