 Thursday, December 17, 2009 501 mots

Hopes for new order from climate chaos
By Clive Cookson

Copenhagen has involved the most complex negotiations of any global conference in recent history, so it is perhaps not surprising that the past fortnight has not gone well. But even those who had low advance expectations have been disappointed by the dominance of nakedly political, self-interested horse-trading - and what seems from 950km away a general air of chaos.

Many participants seem to have lost sight of the reason why they are in Copenhagen: to save the world from what the overwhelming majority of climate scientists insist is an impending disaster, caused by human beings pumping more and more carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere and oceans.

Although climate sceptics are attending (one of their pranks on Thursday was to hang a "Propaganda Warrior" banner from Greenpeace's ship Rainbow Warrior), they form a small minority of the tens of thousands of activists, politicians, bureaucrats and scientists in and around the conference.

A steady stream of new scientific evidence is emerging - and none of it is reassuring. Most importantly, the latest research suggests that the climate is more sensitive to rising levels of man-made carbon dioxide in the atmosphere than scientists had previously feared.

This will make it even harder to limit the global temperature rise to 2°C, a level widely accepted as the maximum compatible with the survival of modern industrial civilisation in something like its present form.

Critics often accuse climatologists of deliberately exaggerating the threat, so as to scare the world into action against climate change. In my recent experience, the opposite is the case. Some experts have privately become so frightened by the outlook over the next few decades that they are toning down their public statements to avoid accusations of alarmism.

A temperature increase of 3°C this century - which many scientists now think is the best achievable in any realistic scenario of decarbonising the global economy - would have catastrophic consequences for the whole world.

Regions that might at first seem to benefit from global warming, such as inland Canada, Russia or northern Europe, could not avoid a threat to their national security. Even if uncontainable nuclear or biological warfare does not break out, it would be hard for any country to withstand the pressure from millions of migrants trying to escape from places made uninhabitable by climate change.

The world's response to such a grave threat should not be to give up in despair - nor to leap to embrace extremely risky geo-engineering projects - but to wean itself off fossil fuels as quickly as possible, starting on Friday with the concluding discussions in Copenhagen.

Given what has happened so far at the conference, the best we can hope for is a firm declaration signed by the world's leaders, which will lead to a globally binding treaty next year.

That means avoiding at all costs an acrimonious last-minute collapse that would destroy any chance of building in 2010 on what has been achieved this year. Because there are a lot of positives.

While the US has been hamstrung by the reluctance of many members of Congress to pass climate change legislation, the Obama administration has engaged far more constructively than its predecessor with the rest of the world - for example over building up a $100bn-a-year fund (€69bn, £61bn) to help the developing world mitigate and adapt to climate change.

Copenhagen has seen significant advances towards finding ways to spread new, low-carbon technology round the world and to protect forests, whose loss is responsible for an estimated 10-20 per cent of greenhouse gas emissions. Such achievements will be important ingredients in reaching an overarching agreement. So let us hope the leaders will surprise the world and bring order from the chaos generated by their subordinates.
