 WORLD NEWS, Saturday, June 14, 2008 398 mots, p. 8

G8 urged to finance fight against global warming
By Chris Giles and David Pilling in Osaka

Japan, the US and Britain launched a political drive on the eve of the Group of Eight finance ministers meeting in Osaka yesterday to encourage rich countries to pay into new international funds totackle climate change in developing nations.

Saying it was "important to get a head start" while the UN negotiations on a successor to the Kyoto protocol were under way, Hank Paulson, the US Treasury secretary, ex-pressed confidence that other members of the group of leading countries would also donate money to the funds.

The two funds will be administered by the World Bank. One, a clean technology fund, would help developing countries, particularly large polluters such as China and India, to mitigate the effects of global warming by investing in cleaner technology for new power generation. The other, a strategic climate fund, would assist poor countries most at risk from the effect of rising temperatures to adapt to a changing climate.

Mr Paulson said the US would hold a pledging conference later this year aimed at raising an initial $10bn for the funds. The three countries have already promised $5bn of that amount.

Shifting resources from rich to poor countries has always been seen as a potential stumbling block for any agreement on climate change. With developed countries having pumped large quantities of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere for over the past 100 years as they grew rich, emerging economies have insisted they also have the right to increase emissions as their economies expand.

Alistair Darling, the UK chancellor, denied that China and India were being unfairly blamed for adding to global emissions, saying that both were "seized of the need to act urgently". Last week, John Hutton, UK industry secretary, said it was important that China and India were not "demonised" for being heavy polluters.

Financial compensation, with the aim of achieving both growth and a lower-carbon economy, has been seen as the best way of ensuring that development does not automatically lead to increased emissions.

Calling climate change "a problem we can resolve", Mr Darling said: "You can have strong economic growth at the same time as ensuring it is economically sustainable. That prize is in our grasp."

Fukushiro Nukaga, the Japanese finance minister, said he would do his "utmost to urge other countries to come on board" at the G8 finance ministers meeting this weekend and at the leaders' summit next month.

Even if the three finance ministers are successful in attracting new pledges for the World Bank's two funds, the initial $10bn over three years is only a drop in the ocean compared with the eventual sums needed to be transferred from rich to poor countries in a successful global climate change deal.

The World Bank estimates that $30bn a year will be ultimately be needed to ensure that the $10,000bn likely investment in power generation over the next 22 years in developing countries uses lower carbon technologies.
