 WORLD NEWS, Monday, January 21, 2008 398 mots, p. Page 4

Fight climate change with tax not targets, say economists
By TONY BARBER

The European Union should fight climate change with a broad-based carbon tax rather than by setting precise targets for the use of biofuels and renewable energy, according to a team of British economists.

Europe Economics, a London-based consultancy, says biofuels targets amount to "a form of state support for an environmentally and economically harmful activity designed to consolidate existing price support mechanisms for vested interest groups, most notably farmers".

The European Commission on Wednesday will present a plan for tackling climate change that aims to cut greenhouse gas emissions in the EU by 20 per cent of their 1990 levels by 2020.

The Commission's proposal that biofuels should account for 10 per cent of road transport fuels has been questioned in many quarters, including by the Joint Research Centre, the Commission's in-house science institute.

According to Europe Economics, the target would lead to annual subsidies to the biofuels industry of at least Euros 11bn (Dollars 16bn, Pounds 8bn) and possibly as much as Euros 23bn by 2020. This compares with the Euros 40bn that the EU now spends each year on its Common Agricultural Policy.

"It is clear that a European biofuel industry cannot be viable without political support by means of tariffs and very high levels of subsidy," the economists say.

The study was commissioned by Open Europe, a UK think-tank campaigning for a loosely structured, economically liberal EU.

The economists recommend that governments introduce tax breaks for energy-efficient products, a step already under consideration in the UK and France. The EU could play its part by reducing import duties.

The EU imposes a 66 per cent tariff on low-energy light bulbs from China, Pakistan, the Philippines and Vietnam, partly - the report suggests - because of protectionist lobbying from Osram, the German manufacturer owned by Siemens. Without the import duty and value-added-tax, the cost of an imported energy-efficient 60 watt bulb in the UK would be 66p (Dollars 1.29, Euros 0.88) instead of Pounds 4, the report estimates.

Cycling to work could be encouraged by removing tariffs and VAT from standard high-quality imported bicycles, slashing their cost to Pounds 80 from Pounds 250.

"Other green products which should be subject to similar tax and tariff incentives include insulation, condensing boilers, water management systems and heat exchangers," the economists say.

They are highly critical of the EU's carbon emissions trading scheme, saying the allocation of free permits has become "a vehicle for delivering covert industrial subsidies to politically favoured industries on a truly epic scale". They calculate that power generators in the EU have netted Euros 6bn-Euros 8bn in windfall profits since the launch of the ETS in 2005.

"We consider that the most cost-effective way of reducing carbon emissions is to introduce an economy-wide carbon price, and that the best way of doing this would be to abandon the ETS and to tax the consumption of primary fuels in proportion to their carbon content," the economists say.
