National, Wednesday, April 28, 2010, p. A 16Oil Rig Blast Complicates Push for Energy and Climate BillBy JOHN M. BRODERWASHINGTON -- The loss of life and the looming ecological catastrophe from the oil rig explosion in the Gulf of Mexico have piled political complications onto the push for energy and climate change legislation here, officials and interest groups say.Expanded offshore oil and gas drilling is a central component to the compromise plan being written in the Senate to address the nation's energy needs and the emissions of the gases that contribute to global warming. The plan, which still does not exist in legislative form, would also include multibillion-dollar incentives for nuclear power and so-called clean-coal research.The energy initiative is already in trouble because a crucial sponsor, Senator Lindsey Graham, Republican of South Carolina, has walked away from negotiations as a result of a dispute with the White House and Senate Democratic leaders over immigration policy.The oil spill may have added to its distress. Several senators said they were troubled by the accident and might not support broad climate and energy legislation if it contains expanding drilling without adequate safeguards.Senator Robert Menendez, Democrat of New Jersey, said he had many concerns about the energy bill that appears to be taking shape, chief among them the aggressive pursuit of offshore oil."I have been an advocate of climate change legislation, but I'm going to have a real problem if we have drilling as I've heard it," Mr. Menendez said in an interview. "Unless there is the ability for neighboring states to have some type of veto in the process, unless there's some serious environmental consideration before any drilling takes place, unless there are very significant buffer zones, I'm going to have a hard time at the end of the day supporting this legislation."Several other coastal-state senators whose votes could be crucial to passage of climate legislation have expressed concerns about the safety and environmental impacts of offshore drilling. They include Sheldon Whitehouse, Democrat of Rhode Island; Frank R. Lautenberg, Democrat of New Jersey; Benjamin L. Cardin and Barbara A. Mikulski, Democrats of Maryland; Mark Warner, Democrat of Virginia; Kay Hagan, Democrat of North Carolina; and George LeMieux, Republican of Florida.Last month, President Obamaproposed a significant expansion of offshore drilling, including new areas along the Eastern Seaboard from Delaware to Florida, a section of the eastern Gulf of Mexico and parts of the Arctic coast of Alaska.The proposal was part of a deal to attract Republican support for the climate change bill. The proposal drew strong criticism from environmental groups and some coastal-state governors and representatives.The White House said Tuesday in a statement that Mr. Obama was sticking with his drilling plan despite the accident. It said that the proposal was based on careful scientific and environmental reviews and that before any drilling was permitted, there would be "a careful examination of the potential risks and spill response capabilities in the area involved."But the administration also sought to contain the environmental and political damage with an announcement that the Departments of Interior and Homeland Security would conduct a broad investigation of the accident and the response to it.The spill has also scrambled politics in Florida, where beaches may be fouled by the growing oil slick oozing from beneath the Deepwater Horizon rig off Louisiana.Gov. Charlie Crist of Florida, a Republican who is facing a tough campaign for the Senate and has supported expanded drilling off the state's coastlines, said Tuesday that he was rethinking his position in light of the accident."If this doesn't give somebody pause, there's something wrong," Mr. Crist told reporters before heading out on a helicopter to view the spreading slick."This is, as I understand it, a pretty new rig with modern technology. As I've always said, it would need to be far enough, clean enough and safe enough. I'm not sure this was far enough. I'm pretty sure it was not clean enough. And it doesn't sound like it was safe enough. It's not a great situation."Senator Bill Nelson, Democrat of Florida, called for a thorough investigation of the industry's safety practices. Mr. Nelson pressured the Obama administration to extend the coastal buffer zone off Florida to 125 miles from 75. Now he said he was not certain that even that was enough margin for safety."The tragedy off the coast of Louisiana shows we need to be asking a lot more tough questions of Big Oil," Mr. Nelson said. "I think we need to look back over 10 years or so to see if the record denies the industry's claims about safety and technology."