Telegraph (London, UK) Monday, April 12, 2010BRITAIN'S WEATHER TO BECOME LESS CHANGEABLEAlastair JamiesonBRITAIN could be losing its famously unpredictable weather, according to climate change researchers.A study into the shifting "character" of weather suggests conditions in temperate parts of the globe are becoming less changeable, while those in the far north are turning more unpredictable.The research, published in a journal, Global Environmental Change, investigated the notion that the climate was not necessarily heating up, but that conditions were becoming more varied in places.Its findings were inspired by anecdotal claims by Inuit communities in the Arctic that increasingly unpredictable conditions were making it harder to hunt."The character of weather is changing," said Dr Betsy Weatherhead, an atmospheric physicist at the University of Colorado and the lead author of the report.She said "persistence" - the tendency of weather to remain stable for a few days at a time - was decreasing across the Arctic, but was on the increase in more temperate zones."At mid-latitudes, we're getting a lot more persistent weather," she said.The findings will not surprise Britons after a winter that saw one of the most protracted cold spells in 30 years.However, the suggestion Britain's weather is becoming more predictable may not chime with the Met Office, which has abandoned long-range forecasts after last year's "barbecue summer" prophecy saw rainfall and ridicule in equal measure.Meteorologists said the findings underlined the need for more research into fluctuations in patterns such as the North Atlantic Oscillation and the Arctic Oscillation, the latter of which was blamed for Britain's cold winter by pushing colder air southwards from its usual course.Philip Eden, The Daily Telegraph weather correspondent, said: "Persistence is a fundamental part of all regional climatologies, and it surprises me that people have not been analysing it until now."Dr Weatherhead's study was prompted by an apparent disparity between temperature data and reports from Inuit communities that increasingly unpredictable weather was endangering the livelihood of hunters."We know that things pass and there's a natural time spell to it," she said. "We know that a cold spell doesn't last half a day, for instance." Analysis of hourly weather logs for May and June in two such communities confirmed that, while the weather wasn't necessarily unusual, the speed of changes had grown over the past four decades."We had always had the data, we just hadn't asked the right question," said Dr Weatherhead. Dr Stephen Dorling, a senior lecturer in meteorology at the University of East Anglia in Norwich, said: "Analysing hourly data is painstaking but much more research is needed before we can say for certain what the links are between weather in one area and weather in another."Many countries are in the middle latitudes, not just little old Britain.We are still learning about oscillations and what they mean for our climate - there is so much that we don't know."30 The number of years since Britain had a winter as cold and as protracted as 2009/10