 Thursday, July 9, 2009 425 mots

Climate change talks grind to halt
By Guy Dinmore in L'Aquila

Leaders of the world's 16 biggest polluters on Thursday were on the brink of failing to agree targets to cut greenhouse gases, jeopardising the outcome of the Copenhagen climate summit set for December.

"The G8 missed a unique opportunity on climate change," Ban Ki-moon, UN secretary-general, said as the talks stuttered to a halt.

However, Barack Obama, US president, said there was still time to reach a climate change agreement this year. Failure to agree targets would set the stage for recriminations between rich and poor nations.

The Major Economies Forum managed to agree that average global temperatures should not rise more than two degrees above pre-industrial levels, but India and China resisted developed nations' pressure to set a target of cutting emissions by an average of 50 per cent by 2050.

"This is a huge missed opportunity. With new leadership in the US there was great optimism. It could have been a dramatic turning point," said Anantha Guruswamy of Greenpeace.

"The blame game will start. The EU and others are blaming India and China and then there will be a harsh pushback . . . I don't see how they can resolve this in the next months before Copenhagen," he said.

Although the G8 developed countries had agreed among themselves on Wednesday to set a target of reducing their emissions by 80 per cent by 2050, they failed to tackle concrete measures, establish more immediate targets or provide the huge funds needed to help developing nations cope with climate change and cut their emissions.

Gordon Brown, UK prime minister, has led the way in saying $100bn (€72bn, £62bn) a year will be needed by 2020. Scientists and NGOs have talked of $150bn.

China in particular demanded, but failed to get, G8 assurances that intellectual property rights would be relaxed so it could benefit from new technologies to become a leading player in clean energy markets.

Joanne Green, head of policy for Cafod, the Catholic Agency for Overseas Development, said agreement on the two degree limit was welcome but overdue, and represented just an "inching forward" that put success at Copenhagen at risk.

The UN conference in December is intended to set a global programme to combat climate change to replace the Kyoto framework which expires in 2012.

"The G8 on Wednesday failed to live up to their responsibilities [as the main initiators of global warming] and make concrete commitments on finance and technology transfer," Cafod said, arguing that "China was moving towards a greener economy more quickly than any of them".

Western officials sought to minimise the differences between the two blocs, with India and China in effect representing the Group of 77 developing nations. One EU diplomat called the two degree accord "the big success story of the week".

Oxfam, the aid agency, said: "If the G8 dealt with the climate crunch as fast as they did the credit crunch, millions of poor people would be saved."

Meanwhile, John Sauven, executive director of Greenpeace UK, said: "Without specific short-term targets and immediate financial commitments to help developing countries, all we're being offered is words which will require future governments to be a thousand times better at delivery than our current leaders."
