 BOOK REVIEW, Monday, April 14, 2008 637 mots, p. 8

The climate heretic's handbook

The sceptical literature on global warming is tiny and, to put it generously, of variable quality. Dissent from the received wisdom that climate change is a global emergency that calls for drastic remedies has been overwhelmed. The climate-science establishment is on board; so is the larger scientific community; and so, lately, are most governments, with Britain's leading the way.

Now that the matter has been settled to almost everyone's satisfaction, sceptics are derided as "climate-change deniers" - akin to Holocaust deniers in their moral turpitude and refusal to face the truth. Increasingly, they talk to each other. Nobody else is listening.

This is a shame, because on many points the sceptics happen to be correct. Nigel Lawson's short, splendid book on the subject can leave no fair-minded reader in doubt on that score.

He points out that this was the first book he had trouble placing with a publisher. No British firm would touch it. You will have to read the book to understand how scandalous this is. An Appeal to Reason is elegantly written, thorough, entertaining and, above all, convincing. The foreword quotes a rejection letter: "My fear, with this cogently argued book, is that it flies so much in the face of the prevailing orthodoxy that it would be very difficult to find a wide market." Please, no more cogent arguments: what we want is prevailing orthodoxy.

Lord Lawson is a former energy secretary and chancellor of the exchequer (a former journalist too), not a scientist - but then, as he points out, "neither are the vast majority of those who pronounce on the matter with far greater certainty than I shall do here". Typically, the genuine experts on climate science are cautious in their statements and honest about how little they know. Most of those who claim to speak on their behalf supply the certainty from their own resources.

Lord Lawson appears to know the literature and draws on his experience as a policymaker and member of a House of Lords committee that reported on climate change. The science is clear, he says, that carbon dioxide warms the planet and that the amount of the gas in the atmosphere is rising. Exactly how much it warms the planet, though, is harder to judge. The climate system is complicated and the models far from perfect. The recent warming trend seems to have paused since 2000 - the models did not predict that.

Projecting trends forward a century or more requires not just climate models but long-range economic forecasts as well (because emissions depend on economic activity). The uncertainties multiply.

Still, suppose that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is right and temperatures will rise by between 1.8°C and 4°C by 2100. How much harm would that do? There would be costs, but some benefits as well: the net cost might be modest or negative. Even with the IPCC's pessimistic view of net costs, living standards in the developing world would be 8.5 times higher by 2100 than they are today (compared with 9.5 times higher with no warming). That is not, so to speak, the end of the world.

Admittedly, much of the concern about warming arises not from a gradual increase in temperatures but from the risk of a sudden catastrophe, such as an abrupt rise in sea level, a breakdown of the gulf stream, or a surge in the frequency or intensity of hurricanes. The book looks briefly at the science on each of these. It finds gross exaggeration in the claims of climate prophets and no cause (yet) for alarm. Even by this short book's standards, that section seemed a bit brisk. No doubt authorities such as Al Gore exaggerate the likelihood of such calamities. But even small chances of great disasters may justify policies that provide insurance against them.

As the author emphasises, the eminent economists Partha Dasgupta and Martin Weitzman fiercely criticised the Stern report - the sacred text of climate alarmism - for the way it dealt with risk and inter-generational equity. But soon after pointing this out the book concedes, with less emphasis, that both men think the report's recommendations might still be right, albeit for the wrong reasons. Depending on the degree of catastrophic risk and on society's aversion to it, they concluded that aggressive Stern-like measures could be justified.

Lord Lawson thinks not, and his policy suggestions are mild. They do include a moderate, revenue-neutral carbon tax - but as much to head off worse ideas as for its own merits. The book's great value is not in its policy recommendations but in its assault on the unreason of global-warming alarmism and its secular priesthood.

"The PC at the heart of the IPCC, as it were, is the most oppressive and intolerant form of political correctness in the western world today," says the author. He is right.

The writer is an FT columnist
