 Foreign, Saturday, December 12, 2009 905 mots

Europe Pledges Billions in Climate Change Funding
By JAMES KANTER and ANDREW C. REVKIN; James Kanter reported from Brussels, and Andrew C. Revkin from Copenhagen. Tom Zeller contributed reporting from Copenhagen, and John Broder from Washington.

BRUSSELS -- European Union leaders agreed on Friday to pay $10.5 billion over the next three years to help poor countries begin tackling the effects of global warming -- and to improve the odds of reaching an international climate accord next week at a conference in Copenhagen.

But the developing world is also seeking a commitment from industrial powers to provide long-term financing of more than $100 billion each year by the end of the next decade. European Union leaders left unanswered how much they would give in the longer term.

The push in Brussels, where the European Union is based, came as a group of negotiators in Copenhagen who were convened by the United Nations issued a six-page informal outline of a new climate agreement. The outline sought to pull together a growing stream of conflicting proposals from nations involved in the climate-treaty talks.

The outline calls for wealthy nations to commit themselves to sharp reductions in greenhouse-gas emissions in the next decade, and for all nations to seek jointly to nearly eliminate the emissions by 2050.

But the disagreements on vital numbers remained wide, and sections of the outline concerning some contested issues were left entirely blank. Among the sidestepped items were any long-term goals for financing the deal and provisions for how trade rules might be employed.

Expressing skepticism at a briefing, Todd Stern, the top American negotiator, said that the proposal lacked any language requiring emerging economic powers like China and India to take concrete steps to curb emissions.

Mr. Stern said that the United States would remain steadfast in demanding such a commitment, given that nearly all of the growth in emissions of greenhouse gases in the coming decades is projected to come from such countries.

Suggesting that much remains to be done, he said the section of the outline on curbing emissions reflected "old think" and was "unbalanced in a whole host of ways."

Still, he struck a note of optimism. He said that after months of one-on-one discussions with counterparts from China, he was confident that there was "language we could both agree to, if we can get to the serious stage."

The European Union's pledge to contribute to a global climate fund -- one that the United Nations has said should add up to $30 billion over the next three years -- is one of the largest financing efforts announced so far. The money is meant to help vulnerable nations adapt to the effects of climate change and develop their economies in ways that will help limit emissions of carbon dioxide.

The pledge "is a very clear message indeed to Copenhagen that we are more than ready to assume our share of responsibility," Chancellor Angela Merkel of Germany said at a news conference in Brussels after a meeting of European Union heads of state and government.

Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain sought to underline what was at stake in Copenhagen, both for developing nations threatened by climate change and for wealthier nations seeking to remold the ways they produce and consume energy.

He said there were "few moments in history when nations are summoned to common decisions that will reshape the lives of men and women potentially for generations to come."

In Copenhagen, some of the smallest and most vulnerable countries -- island states facing the prospect of centuries of rising seas in a warming world -- fired off a warning shot in the form of a new draft text of their own.

They called for the proposed ceiling for a rise in global temperature accepted by most nations to be lowered by 0.5 degrees Celsius.

The world's industrialized countries and emerging economic powers have pledged over the past year to work to limit warming to less than 2 degrees Celsius above where temperatures stood in the 1800s. That translates roughly into a rise of no more than 1.3 degrees Fahrenheit from today's average global temperature of about 59 degrees.

But given projections for greenhouse gas emissions and what is known about how the gases trap heat, even that target will be tough to reach, many climate scientists say.

Money is central to the demands by poor nations. Most African countries and small island states have demanded aid as a condition for signing a new pact to replace the 1997 Kyoto Protocol, which expires in 2012.

The European Union has led efforts to raise money for what is known as a fast-start fund, with its contributions meant to be joined by donations from other advanced nations, including the United States.

But it is not yet clear if or when the money will be available.

The Obama administration has asked Congress for $1.2 billion in financing for adaptation, technology transfer and clean-energy projects in the developing world. But Congress has not yet acted on the request.

The rest of the hoped-for American contribution could come from a government auction of emissions permits as part of a cap-and-trade system for limiting emissions by American industries. But legislation on such a system still is stuck in the Senate.

In Brussels, Ms. Merkel warned on Friday that long-term financing for developing countries would be crucial to any deal next week. "This is the biggest headache to me," she said.

She also suggested that the United States needed to make a commitment to long-term financing before the European Union clarified how much it would put on the table.

Meanwhile. Mr. Brown and President Nicolas Sarkozy of France supported using "innovative financing mechanisms," like a tax on global financial transactions, to help developing countries transform their energy systems.

Advocacy groups and some environmental campaigners condemned the pledges in Brussels as inadequate.

Tim Gore, a climate change advisor for Oxfam, a group that fights poverty, said the offer was "mostly a recycling of past promises and payments that have already been made," and would siphon funds from areas other than climate protection.

Fredrik Reinfeldt, the Swedish prime minister, acknowledged that the pledges were "a combination of new and old resources."

Over the weekend, attention is expected to shift back to Copenhagen, where environment ministers are to hold negotiations. Police officers there have begun bracing for several planned protests. On Friday, at least 76 protesters were arrested in various parts of the city center after signaling an intention to disrupt business at the sites of several international corporations in Copenhagen, including the shipping giant Maersk, McDonald's and other firms.

Chants of "our climate is not your business!" could be heard as groups of demonstrators made their way through the streets, many of them carrying maps and instructions about which businesses to make targets.

On Saturday, a much larger demonstration is planned by a broad coalition of organizations. Protesters are expected to march along an approved route from the Parliament to the Bella Center, where thousands of negotiators and delegates are gathered.
