 National, Thursday, May 14, 2009 506 mots, p. A 19

House Panel Nears Agreement on Energy and Climate Bill
By JOHN M. BRODER

WASHINGTON - With a series of compromises on the stickiest issues behind them, the House Energy and Commerce Committee is poised to approve far-reaching legislation on energy and global warming by the end of next week. Where it goes from there remains highly uncertain.

President Obama on Wednesday praised the committee's "extraordinary progress" toward writing a bill that can survive among the panel's fractious Democrats. After a White House meeting with House leaders, Mr. Obama said that the bill as it now stands, though weaker in a number of areas than the original version introduced six weeks ago, represented a major step toward his goals of addressing climate change and reducing the nation's reliance on dirty fuels.

But with that modest endorsement, Mr. Obama quickly pivoted to his more immediate legislative priority, changes in health care costs and coverage, which he insisted have to be made this year. He has set no deadline for energy legislation.

Representative Henry A. Waxman, the California Democrat who is chairman of the Energy and Commerce Committee, said he was eager to complete committee work on the energy bill so he could turn his attention to health care.

Speaker Nancy Pelosi said she intended to hold a full House vote on health care legislation by the end of July. On energy, she has said only that she hoped for a vote "this year," an aide said.

The measure before the House panel, written by Mr. Waxman and Representative Edward J. Markey, Democrat of Massachusetts, now calls for a 17 percent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions from 2005 levels by 2020; the original target was 20 percent. The long-range target, an 83 percent reduction by 2050, still stands.

Among the most difficult discussions were those that concerned the granting of free emissions permits under the bill's cap-and-trade provisions. In the current compromise, 35 percent of all permits will be granted to local utility companies to cushion the higher costs of producing electricity in a way that emits less carbon dioxide.

An additional 15 percent of permits will be given to reduce costs in energy-intensive industries like steel, cement and aluminum, which face stiff international competition.

Three percent of permit value will go to the auto industry for work on electric and advanced-technology vehicles, although the subsidy falls to 1 percent after five years. Committee members are still negotiating the level of free allowances for petroleum refiners.

The free allowances would be phased out over 10 to 15 years.

Panel members also agreed to soften the original measure's mandates for the proportion of electricity production that must come from renewable sources like wind, solar or geothermal power. The first Waxman-Markey draft called for a nationwide standard of 25 percent by 2025; that has now been reduced to 15 percent by 2020, with complex exemptions for some regions and energy sources.

Representative Rick Boucher, the Virginia Democrat who leads the so-called Brown Dog Democrats, who represent regions heavily dependent on coal for power generation, said he believed that the committee was on track to pass the bill. But he cautioned that several issues remained to be settled and that "until everything is agreed, nothing is agreed."

Because of the makeup of the committee, Mr. Waxman can move his bill without any Republican support. He will probably need to: Representative Joe Barton of Texas, the senior Republican on the committee, said his 23 members were united in opposition. Mr. Barton, an outspoken skeptic on the science of climate change, predicted that even if the committee passed the bill, the full House and Senate were unlikely to act on it any time soon.

"It's just not a good political tactic in this kind of economy," he said. "This is not the time to tackle this kind of issue."
