

The New York Times (web site)
Sunday, March 14, 2021 -  1577 mots

Biden Vowed to Make Climate ‘Essential’ to Foreign Policy.
The Reality Is Harder.

By Lisa Friedman

So far, repairing alliances and restoring friendships seem to be taking precedence.

WASHINGTON — In late January, President Biden pledged to make combating climate change “an essential
element of U.S. foreign policy and national security,” appointing a high-powered global climate envoy and
salting the State Department with climate expertise.

In   the   weeks   that   followed,   the   administration   showed   that   more   immediate   demands,   like   bolstering
military security and repairing strained friendships will provide stiff competition.

When Mexico earlier this month passed an energy bill that set back the country’s climate goals, the Biden
administration raised no public objections. The White House has taken no fresh steps to block one of the
world’s highest-proﬁle fossil fuel projects, a natural gas pipeline from Russia to Germany, despite assuring
Congress that Mr. Biden opposes it.

And on Friday, over the ﬁerce protests of environmental activists, the Biden administration allowed a former
Australian ﬁnance minister — who tried to abolish Australia’s renewable energy targets and once called
carbon   pricing   a   “very   expensive   hoax”   —   to   be   named   director   of   the   Organization   for   Economic
Co-operation and Development.

The   O.E.C.D.,   a   37-nation   body   based   in   Paris,   exists   to   help   coordinate   the   domestic   and   international
economic and trade policies of its upper-income member states.

The decisions have disappointed environmental leaders at home and abroad, who said they feared that Mr.
Biden was undercutting his own promise of elevating climate change.

“It’s essential this isn’t just words,” said Laurence Tubiana, France’s former climate change ambassador who
is now the chief executive of the European Climate Foundation.

Yet with concerns like immigration, containing China and rebuilding frayed alliances proving pressing for the
White   House,   foreign   policy   experts   say   it’s   no   surprise   that   climate change   has   chafed   against   other
priorities.

“Look, foreign policy is about trade-offs: It’s about what’s desirable but also what’s feasible,” said Richard N.
Haass, a longtime U.S. diplomat who is now president of the Council on Foreign Relations. “Climate has to
compete with other issues and priorities in the U.S. agenda.”

There’s no dispute that the Biden administration has already elevated climate change across the U.S. foreign
policy apparatus, far beyond what the Obama administration did.

Mr. Biden rejoined the Paris climate agreement on Inauguration Day and canceled the Keystone XL oil
pipeline   to   the   disappointment   of   Canadian   leaders.   He   designated   the   ﬁrst   high-level   summit   of   his
administration to be focused on raising global climate ambition. He has discussed climate change in virtually
every call and meeting with foreign leaders, and in the most consequential sign of his commitment, Mr.
Biden tapped former Secretary of State John Kerry to be his presidential envoy for climate change with a seat
on the National Security Council, a ﬁrst for climate change.

On Friday when Mr. Biden met with the leaders of India, Australia and Japan, climate change shared the
stage with just two other priorities: Covid-19 vaccines and cyberthreats.

“Climate is at the center of our foreign policy because it is one of the few existential challenges we face and
because the crisis is, by deﬁnition, a challenge we must work together with global allies and partners to
address,” Secretary of State Antony J. Blinken said in a statement to The New York Times.

 





In a speech last week, Mr. Blinken outlined his top-eight policy priorities; No. 6 was to “tackle the climate
crisis and drive a green-energy revolution.”


Structural changes are also weaving climate change into every part of foreign policy planning.

The N.S.C.’s director for climate and energy now reports directly to Mr. Biden’s top national security advisers
rather than to the director of international economics. And a member of Mr. Kerry’s climate staff also serves
on Mr. Blinken’s policy team at the State Department.

“In the Obama administration climate change was a huge priority, but climate generally was dealt with by
specialists, only in kind of a niche area in different departments,” said Jon Finer, Mr. Biden’s deputy national
security adviser and a former chief of staff to Mr. Kerry. He added that now the issue is “a core element of our
overall strategy, not just a free-standing priority.”

But climate activists said they found it difﬁcult to square that assertion with some of the administration’s
recent decisions, particularly on the O.E.C.D.

According to multiple people familiar with the closed-door process under which nations selected Mathias
Cormann of Australia, the Biden administration supported his rival, Cecilia Malmström of Sweden. But the
United States is typically the kingmaker in the international economic policy forum, with a traditionally
strong voice on the O.E.C.D. director. Activists have charged that Mr. Cormann could never have succeeded if
the Biden administration had strongly opposed him.

“If you want to be seen as a climate champion in the world, then you need to be ﬁghting for a candidate that
understands climate science and is ready to act and lead an organization like the O.E.C.D.,” said Jennifer
Morgan, executive director of Greenpeace International.

“It does not seem that the Biden administration made this a top priority, and that’s clearly disappointing,”
she added.

Climate  advocates  worldwide  had  mounted  a  ﬁerce  campaign  against  Mr.  Cormann,  as  did  the  British
Labour Party and Australia’s Green Party. In a letter to the O.E.C.D., nearly 30 inﬂuential academics, activists
and leaders of research organizations said Mr. Cormann’s record of “thwarting effective  climate action”
should disqualify him from leading the organization that must push developed nations to dramatically
reduce   emissions.   As   Australia’s   ﬁnance   minister   from   2013   to   2020,   Mr.   Cormann   helped   abolish   the
country’s carbon pricing scheme, failed to take any steps to curb carbon pollution and described restrictions
that commercial banks had placed on coal lending as “very, very disappointing.”

Alden Meyer, a senior associate at E3G, a European climate change think tank, said Mr. Cormann’s selection
“raises real questions about whether the countries that supported him are serious about transforming the
global economy as we need to do if we’re going to avoid climate catastrophe, or if they were just trading it off
against some other interest.”

The State Department declined to conﬁrm the administration’s pick for the position, saying the United
States “respects the consensus” reached on Mr. Cormann and vowing that the administration would work
with the O.E.C.D. to pursue “an active and ambitious climate agenda.”

In his own statement, Mr. Cormann said that one of his goals was helping countries achieve a goal of net-
zero emissions by 2050 — something to which Australia has not yet committed.

Stuart   E.   Eizenstat,   who   was   President   Bill   Clinton’s   ambassador   to   the   European   Union   and   his   chief
negotiator on the 1997 Kyoto Protocol climate change accord, said decisions “at the margins” that might cut
against climate goals should not overshadow the signiﬁcant changes on climate change that the Biden
administration is baking in to U.S. foreign policy.

He called Mexico’s energy package, which favors government-owned generating plants largely run on fossil
fuels, a “godawful bill.” But, he pointed out, it was already near passage by the time Mr. Biden held his virtual
bilateral meeting with President Andrés Manuel López Obrador, and that meeting focused primarily on
border control.

Nord Stream 2, the pipeline from Russia to Germany, may be too far down the road to reverse despite years
of U.S. opposition unrelated to climate change, Mr. Eizenstat said. Opposition to the project has centered
around fears that the pipeline would give Russia undue power over Western European energy supplies.



And, Mr. Eizenstat noted, the debate over the O.E.C.D. leader may have hinged as much on taxing digital

 



companies — an issue on which the United States and the European Union have been on opposing sides —
as climate change.


“You have to pick and choose where you ﬁght,” said Mr. Eizenstat, who likened the Biden administration’s
climate policy efforts to President Jimmy Carter’s attempt to make human rights central to foreign policy in
the 1970s.

The Carter administration struggled to make human rights a cornerstone in foreign policy, Mr. Eizenstat
conceded, but it ultimately did elevate its importance on the world stage. Likewise, the Biden administration
is cementing climate change into the architecture of U.S. diplomacy.

“On every major decision now that comes to the president on foreign policy, climate change will be one of
the factors that will be considered,” Mr. Eizenstat said. “It may not always be the one that’s chosen, but it will
be one of the singular issues that people will say, ‘Well, what does this mean for our climate change policy?’
That’s quite important, and it’s never been done before.”

Mr. Haass said “single issue advocacy” policies like the promotion of democracy, human rights or climate
change almost always collide with traditional priorities like war and peace, energy security and alliances. But,
he added, the Biden administration will have an easier time weaving its climate goals into its diplomatic
agenda once the United States takes concrete steps to lower its own emissions.

“Foreign policy begins at home, and in many ways climate policy begins at home,” Mr. Haass said. “The



 


