

The New York Times (web site)
Thursday, February 18, 2021 -  424 mots

As winter wallops the South, a Fed ofﬁcial warns climate
change poses a risk to banks.

By Jeanna Smialek

A top Federal Reserve ofﬁcial delivered a stark warning on Thursday morning: Banks and other lenders need
to prepare themselves for the realities of a world wracked by climate change, and regulators must play a key
role in ensuring that they do so.

“Financial institutions that do not put in place frameworks to measure, monitor, and manage climate-related
risks could face outsized losses on climate-sensitive assets caused by environmental shifts, by a disorderly
transition to a low-carbon economy, or by a combination of both,” Lael Brainard, one of the central bank’s six
Washington-based governors, said in remarks prepared for delivery at an Institute of International Finance
event.

Her comments come against a grim backdrop as abnormally cold weather wallops Texas — leaving millions
without electricity and underlining that state and local authorities in some places are underprepared for
severe weather events, which are expected to become more frequent.

Such disruptions also matter for the ﬁnancial system: They pose risks to insurers, can disrupt the payment
system, and can make otherwise reasonable ﬁnancial bets dicey. That makes it important for the Fed to
understand and plan for them, central bank ofﬁcials have increasingly said.

Ms. Brainard pointed out that ﬁnancial companies are beginning to address the risk by “responding to
investors’ demands for climate-friendly portfolios,” among other changes. But she added that regulators like
the Fed must also adapt. She raised the possibility that bank overseers may need new supervisory tools
because of the challenges of climate oversight, which include long time horizons and limited precedent.

“Scenario analysis may be a helpful tool” to assess “implications of climate-related risks under a wide range of
assumptions,” Ms. Brainard said, making it clear that scenarios would be distinct from full-ﬂedged stress
tests.

She noted that the Fed’s Supervision Climate Committee, which was announced last month, would work “to
develop an appropriate program” to supervise banks’s climate-related risks. The Fed is also co-chair of a task
force on climate-related ﬁnancial risks at the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision, a global regulatory
group.

Weighing in on climate risks publicly is new territory new for the Fed. Ofﬁcials spent years tiptoeing around
the topic, which is politically charged in the United States. The central bank only fully joined a global coalition
dedicated to research on girding the ﬁnancial system against climate risk late last year, and it has recently
seen pushback from Republican lawmakers over the possibility of climate-tied bank stress tests.



 


