

The New York Times (web site)
Wednesday, February 10, 2021 -  1073 mots

True Crime With a Climate Connection

The shift toward cleaner cars, combined with tighter pollution rules, is pushing up demand for the precious
metals in automobile antipollution gadgets. Crooks have taken note.

We’re also covering a deadly ﬂash ﬂood in the Himalayas and new research that shows allergy season is
getting worse.

Automakers are starting to get more serious about the transition to electric vehicles, and that means they’re
going to need rechargeable batteries. Lots of them.

To make those batteries, you need speciﬁc precious metals. And they’re getting more expensive. The price of
one, rhodium, has gone from about $640 an ounce ﬁve years ago to a record $21,900 an ounce this year.

That steep increase isn’t only because of demand from battery producers. The rare metals are also used in
the catalytic converters that help to scrub emissions from traditional gas-powered car and truck tailpipes.
That means increasingly strict emissions rules are also increasing demand.

It also means that theft is rising sharply across the country.

In order to steal the rhodium and other metals, thieves are slithering under those vehicles in parking lots and
driveways around the country and hacking off the catalytic converters.

You can read more in this article, and tell us what you think in the comments section.

The bad news: Unless you’re fully insured, replacing a catalytic converter and ﬁxing the damage thieves can
cause when they steal the device could set you back $2000 dollars or more in repairs.

The silver lining: Fully electric vehicles don’t require catalytic converters. So, once the country switches fully to
plug-in cars, you won’t need to worry about a thief swiping yours in the wee hours of the morning.

More: Our colleague Neal E. Boudette discussed the future of cars and whether traditional automakers or
tech companies, like Tesla and Apple, would rule the roads.

A very bad mix: mountains, ice and climate change

A ﬂash ﬂood killed dozens of people and left hundreds missing in the Indian part of the Himalayas on
Sunday. It was far from the ﬁrst such disaster to occur among the world’s high-mountain glaciers and, in a
world with a changing climate, it won’t be the last.

Glaciers around the world are shrinking and thinning, and that means water is being released. And it has to
go somewhere.

In the Himalayas, as elsewhere, some is trapped in lakes as it runs down mountainsides, dammed by rocky
debris   the   glaciers   leave   behind.   When   those   dams   break,   from   earthquakes   or   just   the   weight   of
accumulating water, the result can be a sudden, catastrophic burst of water that can wipe out communities
in valleys downstream. — Henry Fountain

The big picture: Glacial retreat is happening in mountain ranges around the world and has been measured,
sometimes at a rate of 100 feet or more each year. In the Himalayas, the world’s most glaciated mountains
and home to about 600 billion tons of ice, the rate of retreat has accelerated over the past four decades.

Get the eye drops. Allergy season is getting worse.

Climate change is contributing to disasters around the world, like that ﬂood in India over the weekend. But it
causes smaller, more personal bouts of misery, too. And scientists have now identiﬁed one: Climate change is
making pollen season longer.



That’s the message of a new study this week in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
What’s more, researchers said, the trend of higher pollen counts is accelerating. — John Schwartz

 



The numbers: According to the paper, warmer air and higher levels of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
means springtime in North America has 21 percent more pollen than just a few decades ago.


Where: The most pronounced effects were seen in Texas, the Midwest and the Southeast.

Also important this week:

China’s emissions: New research conﬁrmed that emissions of CFCs, a banned gas that harms Earth’s ozone
layer, have fallen sharply after dangerous spike.

A surprise in Africa: Air quality is improving in one of the continent’s fastest-growing regions, according to a
study. Usually, economic expansion means more pollution.Coal use falls: The share of energy generated from
coal   dropped   more   sharply   during   the   coronavirus   pandemic   than   that   of   any   other   power   source,
researchers found.Lost and found in Antarctica: A meteorologist lost his wallet at McMurdo Station in the
1960s. He just got it back.Island feud: The Paciﬁc Islands Forum is on the brink of collapse because of a
leadership dispute. The regional group has long been a megaphone on climate change.Climate anxiety: If
you’re feeling it, you’re not alone. Distress over global warming is increasing, but formal and informal support
networks are springing up, too.Lives lived: Paul Crutzen, a Nobel laureate who fought climate change, is dead
at 87. He warned the world of threats that certain chemicals posed to the ozone layer.

And ﬁnally, we recommend:

Life on Venus? The picture gets cloudier

A team of astronomers made a blockbuster claim in the fall. They said they’d discovered evidence of a
molecule called phosphine on Venus, compelling evidence pointing to life ﬂoating in the clouds of the
planet.

The members of the team are still certain of their ﬁndings today, even after lowering their estimates of how
much phosphine may be present. At the same time, many of their peers remain just as resolute in their
doubts.

The debate could linger, unresolved, for years, much like past disputed claims for evidence of life on Mars.
But, if true, the ﬁnding would be stunning.

“Further observations are warranted,” said Bryan Butler of the National Radio Astronomy Observatory in
Socorro, N.M. “There’s nothing you can point to that says, ‘Oh, yeah, we absolutely see phosphine on Venus.’”

“But, you know, it’s tantalizing,” he added. “I would not bet my life savings that it’s not there.” You can read all
about it here. — Kenneth Chang and Shannon Stirone

This newsletter is free, but you can go deeper into the articles we highlight each week with a subscription to
The Times. Please consider becoming a subscriber today.

If you’re not getting Climate Fwd: in your inbox, you can sign up here

We’d   love   your   feedback   on   the   newsletter.   We   read   every   message,   and   reply   to   many!   Please   email
thoughts and suggestions to climateteam@nytimes.com ().

 


