

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Wednesday, March 24, 2021 343 mots, p. 3

Weeds pose greatest ever threat to crops due to climate
change

By Olivia Rudgard ENVIRONMENT CORRESPONDENT

WEEDS are prospering as a result of climate change and are a greater threat to food crops now than at any
point in human history, scientists have warned.

Food security is under threat if weed resistance to herbicides becomes widespread, a study has said, because
crops are more badly affected by them than they were in the pre-herbicide era.

The paper from Rothamsted Research, the agricultural research institute, compared the progress of land
treated with herbicides since the 1960s and land where the chemicals had not been used.

On the herbicide-free land, weeds had cut the yield by more than half, up from a third in the ﬁrst 10 years of
the study. The weeds crowd out the wheat because they do better in a warmer climate and because modern
crops are shorter to maximise their productivity, the authors said.

At the Hertfordshire study site average temperatures have risen at a rate of 0.04 degrees per year and are
now around two degrees higher than in 1969, the scientists said in a paper published in the journal Global
Change

Biology.

"If we could no longer rely on herbicides, it could be argued that, in terms of weed pressure, the situation is
now worse than before their widespread introduction in the 1960s," the paper concludes.

Herbicide resistance is a growing threat to agriculture. In the UK, blackgrass has developed resistance to
many of the herbicides used to control it and can pose a serious threat to yields if not controlled.

The use of nitrogen fertiliser, widely applied to boost soil fertility, increased yields where herbicides were used
but caused a decline in yields on the non-herbicide areas because it boosted weed growth and caused
competition for resources.

Lead   author   Dr   Jonathan   Storkey   said:   "Our   results   demonstrate   that   weeds   now   represent   a   greater
inherent threat to crop production than before the advent of herbicides and integrated, sustainable solutions
to weed management are urgently needed to protect the high yield potential of crop varieties."


 


