 Thursday, September 17, 2009 313 mots

Finance groups demand tough climate targets
By Fiona Harvey in London

Some of the biggest names in finance called on governments on Wednesday to strike a tough deal on emissions reductions in Copenhagen this December, in an effort to boost investment into climate change.

The investors, with a combined $13,000bn in assets under management, demanded higher commitments on emissions reductions than nations are likely to agree. Signatories include investors such as HSBC, Hermes, ING Group, Société Général, Swiss Re, Allianz Global Investors and numerous US and European public sector pension funds.

They called on rich countries to agree to cut their emissions by between 25 per cent and 40 per cent by 2020, compared with 1990 levels - a cut much deeper than the US has said it would sign up to but in line with what scientists have estimated will be necessary to avoid dangerous consequences from climate change.

Investors and companies should see climate change as a threat to the global economy and a business opportunity, Lord Stern, author of the influential review of the economics of climate change, said at a conference on Wednesday to launch the investment groups' call.

"Building a low carbon economy creates opportunities for investment in new technologies that promise to transform our society in the same way as the introduction of electricity or railways did in the past," he said.

The signatories also want developed nations to cut their emissions by between 80 per cent and 95 per cent by 2050, and called on the developing world to participate in a plan for global emissions to be slashed by 50 per cent to 85 per cent by the same date.

Big developing countries such as China and India have opposed such a global target, fearing it would be used as a weapon to try to force upon them more stringent emissions curbs than they are prepared to undertake.

A system of carbon trading would also be needed, the group said, and the current system under the United Nations - called the clean development mechanism - should be reformed.

The companies were brought together by several groups, including the Investor Network on Climate Risk in the US and the European Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change.

Their call reflects a growing belief among many businesses that a worldwide agreement on climate change and greenhouse gases is essential to create a level playing field among companies and to give them greater certainty and ­clarity in making investments, such as in building programmes.
