 ROAD TO COPENHAGEN, Wednesday, September 23, 2009 576 mots, p. 12

Horse trading on climate treaty has yet to pay dividends
By Fiona Harvey, Environment Correspondent

Any hope that the conference on climate change in Copenhagen this December would produce a new treaty in the mould of the 1997 Kyoto protocol has long faded, even among its strongest proponents.

The question is, in the absence of a complete treaty, what constitutes a successful outcome at the conference - and whether the prospects for a good deal are so dim that parties should resign themselves to continuing negotiations into next year.

For the United Nations, four key elements must be included: mid-term and long-term targets for cutting emissions; developing countries, which will not have mid-term emissions-cutting targets, committing to certain actions to curb their emissions' growth; financing from developed to developing nations to help them cut emissions and adapt to climate change; and mechanisms to ensure finance flows, such as a cap-and-trade system.

With fewer than 80 days to go, there is agreement on none of these.

Top of the list of prerequisites for success is setting targets for emissions reduction, by 2020 and by 2050. Scientific advice is for developed countries to cut emissions by 25-40 per cent compared with 1990 levels. Europe and Japan have both agreed cuts broadly on this level - the European Union has agreed to raise its promise of 20 per cent cuts to 30 per cent if other countries fell in line.

But the US will not. Its emissions rose by about 16 per cent from 1990 to 2005 and the most the White House thinks feasible is a cut of 17 per cent on current levels.

While this may look feeble compared with the EU's 20 per cent pledge, in fact the amount of effort required to reach this level is about equal to that required of the EU from current emissions levels.

The UN also wants all countries to set a global target of halving emissions by 2050. Developing countries will not be asked to take on absolute cuts, but to ensure their emissions increase at a slower rate than before - in the jargon, to "deviate from business as usual".

This, too, has proved more contentious than the UN hoped. China and India are reluctant to agree a global target because they fear it will be used later to strong-arm them into absolute cuts.

Rich nations would also like to see emerging economies set a target date for a peak of emissions. Again, China and India have strongly resisted this.

Financing from the rich to the poor world will be tricky to resolve. Developing countries and non-government groups have suggested finance flows must reach $150bn (£92bn) a year. Rich countries will not agree such sums.

The EU has been first to come forward, with financing of €2bn-€15bn a year. The US has indicated that the cap-and-trade bill in the Senate would provide for similar funding through the purchase of carbon offsets from developing countries.

Most countries recognise that a financing mechanism - such as a cap-and-trade system - is needed, as most of the money must come from the private sector.

Even on lesser issues, argument still rages. On forestry the vexed question of how to compensate developing nations such as Brazil and Indonesia for keeping their forests intact has not been resolved.

But the UN and leading governments insist a strong deal is still possible. Yvo de Boer, UN climate change chief, points to progress in moves by China and India this week. "We are too close to an agreement now to fail at the last gate," he said.

But leading EU countries have begun to talk of a "political declaration" rather than a full agreement leading to a treaty.

Connie Hedegaard, the Danish environment minister who will host the talks, told the Financial Times: "What I see at Copenhagen is that we define the politics, what we want, and then some experts have to decide exactly how that comes into being."

Jennifer Morgan, climate director at the World Resources Institute, warns of "the greenwash scenario - they package up the things they're doing already, tie it in a bow and call it a success".

Lord Stern, former World Bank chief economist, warns against agreeing a deal with too weak targets that "would be hard to unravel later".

Whether Copenhagen is a success, a failure or a muddled mixture, it will certainly not be the last word on climate change.

Editorial Comment, Page 16
