 National, Wednesday, May 14, 2008 472 mots, p. A 16

Stumping On Climate, McCain Faults Bush
By ELISABETH BUMILLER

NORTH BEND, Wash. - Senator John McCain intensified his criticism of President Bush and the administration's environmental polices on Tuesday, taking a walk in the cold, rain-drenched foothills of the Cascade Mountains and asserting that in the effort to stem climate change, "America can lead and not obstruct."

At an outdoor news conference in the Cedar River Watershed east of Seattle, Mr. McCain, the presumptive Republican presidential nominee, declared that "the president and I have disagreed on this issue for many years -- it isn't a recent disagreement." He added, "There is a longstanding, significant, deep, strong difference on this issue between myself and the administration."

Mr. McCain was on his second day of a trip to the Pacific Northwest, a potential swing region in the November election, to promote his plan to slow global warming and appeal to the region's many independent voters who view the environment as an election issue of critical concern. Mr. Bush, who questioned the scientific basis for global warming in his first term, is deeply unpopular, and Mr. McCain, whom the president endorsed at the White House in March, has been sprinting away from him this week.

The senator has proposed mandatory limits on greenhouse gas emissions in the United States -- Mr. Bush is opposed -- but Mr. McCain's Democratic competitors, Senators Barack Obama and Hillary Rodham Clinton, have offered plans to reduce emissions more quickly.

Asked at his news conference why voters who are concerned about the environment should support him over Mr. Obama or Mrs. Clinton, Mr. McCain said that his proposal was "doable" and that his rivals "have never to my knowledge been involved in legislation nor hearings nor engagement in this issue."

He did not mention that in 2007, Mrs. Clinton and Mr. Obama were co-sponsors of an emissions-curbing bill that he introduced with Senator Joseph I. Lieberman, independent of Connecticut. In addition, Mrs. Clinton went with Mr. McCain and other senators on a 2004 trip to Svalbard, a Norwegian archipelago, to see the effects of global warming. Mr. McCain mentioned that journey in a speech Monday on climate change, but he did not mention that Mrs. Clinton was one of those who went along.

Before his news conference Tuesday, Mr. McCain led a round-table discussion with environmentalists and local leaders at the education center of the Cedar River Watershed, which supplies water for Seattle. The panelist Mr. McCain appeared most excited to meet was Sally Jewell, chief executive of the outdoor gear and attire company REI, based in Seattle, who told Mr. McCain that she was converting 10 REI stores to solar power and that if she had federal incentives, they would help.

Mr. McCain made no promises but said the panel had renewed his enthusiasm to return to Washington "to try to do the Lord's work in the city of Satan" -- one of his favorite expressions.

In addition to the criticism of Mr. Bush, which Mr. McCain delivered against the backdrop of mist-shrouded Rattlesnake Lake, the senator's campaign day appeared organized around television pictures of him walking amid Pacific Northwest scenery with important local environmentalists. Within the Cedar River Watershed, the group ambled over the Masonry Dam and along the Chester Morris Lake and then took a brief stroll in the woods, with camera crews in tow.
