The New York Times on the Web
Foreign, Friday, May 29, 2009 475 mots

Hope, but No Advances, in China-U.S. Climate Talks
By ANDREW JACOBS

BEIJING - Five days of talks aimed at bringing China and the United States closer together on the issue of climate change did not yield substantial progress, according to a Congressional delegation that met with environmental officials and the country's top leaders this week.

During a news conference on Thursday night, Nancy Pelosi, the speaker of House, said she was "hopeful" after meeting with a number of officials, including President Hu Jintao and Prime Minister Wen Jiabao.

But Representative F. James Sensenbrenner, a Wisconsin Republican who took part, said he was discouraged by the Chinese refusal to commit to greater cuts in greenhouse gases while insisting that developed nations do more to reduce their emissions.

"It's business as usual for China," said Mr. Sensenbrenner, the ranking Republican on the House Select Committee for Energy Independence and Global Warming. "The message that I received was that China was going to do it their way regardless of what the rest of the world negotiates in Copenhagen."

He was referring to the United Nations summit on climate change to be held in Denmark this year, the successor to the meeting in Kyoto, Japan, which produced the last global warming agreement in 1997. In previous statements, China has suggested that developed nations reduce emissions by 40 percent by 2020 from 1995 levels. By contrast, Mr. Sensenbrenner said, Chinese officials have linked their proposed reductions to the size of China's economy, which is growing significantly. The resulting math, he said, would mean "a significant increase in emissions in China."

China and the United States are responsible for nearly half the world's output of carbon gases, although many scientists say the Chinese share is larger and growing at a rapid pace due to its reliance on coal-fired power plants.

In addition to discussing climate change, Ms. Pelosi said she raised a number of issues during her talks with Chinese leaders, including intellectual property rights, human rights and North Korea's test of a nuclear device on Monday.

While she did not provide details of those talks, she described them as "candid" and said they included such delicate topics as Tibet and China's rights record. She said she had "encouraged conversations with his holiness, the Dalai Lama, or his representatives." Until Thursday, Ms. Pelosi, who is known here for her strident criticisms of China's human rights record, had not spoken about the issue in public statements or during an appearance before students and faculty at Tsinghua University.

Representative Edward J. Markey, a Massachusetts Democrat who is chairman of the House global warming committee, acknowledged that without significant concessions from China, Congress might be disinclined to act on its own package of emissions limits.

But after years of American intransigence on global warming, Mr. Markey said he thought China would be influenced by the Obama administration's commitment to the issue. "We leave here with some sense that we can reach an agreement," he said, although he added a caveat. "This is going to be on one of the most complex diplomatic negotiations in the history of the world," he said.

Not everyone involved in the discussions was so pessimistic. During a news conference earlier in the day, Senator John Kerry said he was encouraged by Chinese leaders' commitment to tackling climate change. He noted that China in recent years had tripled its capacity for wind generation, enacted vehicle fuel standards tougher than those in America and closed hundreds of obsolete, coal-fired power plants. "It's unequivocally the most constructive and productive discussions I've ever had with Chinese officials," he said.
