Telegraph (London, UK) Thursday, December 2, 2010UN REPORT CALLS FOR WORLD BAN ON TRADITIONAL LIGHTBULBSLouise Gray in CancunTRADITIONAL lightbulbs should be banned around the world to help tackle climate change, a United Nations report says.A UN study found that if every nation switched from incandescent lamps to energy--efficient alternatives, the world's electricity demand for lighting would fall by more than 2 per cent. This is equivalent to saving about 800 million tons of carbon emissions. The study was disclosed at UN talks in Cancun to prove how easy it would be to cut emissions if the world worked together.Britain is already phasing out traditional bulbs as part of European regulations.The scheme has been unpopular with many because compact fluorescent lamps (CFLs) take longer to warm up and can give some people headaches. But they last 10 times longer and require far less electricity to produce the same amount of light.Indonesia alone could save $1 billion (GBP640 million) a year and cut its greenhouse gas emissions by eight million tons of CO2 a year, the equivalent of taking two million cars off the road each year.Small nations such as Cambodia could save more than 30 per cent of electricity consumption while reducing CO2 emissions by 13 per cent.At the moment at least half of the lights sold are the inef--ficient incandescent lamps, which cost a quarter of the price of energy--saving bulbs.However, CFLs are becoming cheaper and could fall further in price if there is mass demand across the world.New Light Emitting Diodes (LEDs), which are due to come in soon, will be even cheaper and more efficient.Already lighting companies such as Osram and Phillips are rolling out the new models in developing countries.The UN said it was up to each country to determine the best way to encourage a switch to energy efficient models.Other ways to encourage the switch include using taxes, subsidies or campaigns.The US, Australia, Cuba, Canada and the Philippines are all banning incandescent bulbs, as well as Europe.The UN is trying to phase out incandescent bulbs in China, Russia, Vietnam and Morocco.Achim Steiner, the head of the UN's Environment Programme, said it would not only be good for climate change but the economy, as businesses saved money on lighting and fewer power stations were needed.