Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, December 1, 2010ISLANDERS SEEK INSURANCE FUND TO FIGHT 'EXTINCTION'Louise Gray in CancunSMALL island states are calling for a "climate change insurance fund" to protect their people from "going extinct" as a new United Nations report warned that rising sea levels would make whole nations uninhabitable.The study of climate change impact in the Caribbean warned that sea levels could rise by up to 6.5ft (2 metres) by the end of the 21st century if global warming continues. There is also an increased risk of hurricanes and storm surges.According to the research by Oxford University, this would mean that 260,000 people would be displaced from the islands, onemillion would be at risk of flooding and billions of dollars would be lost every year from the tourism industry alone.As 194 nations meet in Cancun, Mexico, for the latest round of UN talks on global warming, small island states are demanding tougher action to stop climate change.Antonio Lima, the vice chairman of the Alliance of Small Island States (Aosis), said whole nations would be washed away by rising seas.He said the people of Kiribati, Tuvalu, most of the Cook Islands, the Marshall Islands and the Maldives -- which are all just a few metres above sea level now -- could be lost as a race."We are going to be the first human species endangered in the 21st century. We are going to be in danger of going extinct," he said."We do not want to be the forgotten of the 21st century. We do not want to be sacrificed. We want to survive, and to survive we need solidarity from those who can do something about the weather." As well as cuts in emissions to stop global warming, the small island states are calling for a "global insurance fund" to be set up that would help vulnerable nations cope with the effects of climate change.Poor nations at risk from rising sea levels would pay an annual premium, but a large chunk of the money would come from climate-change aid provided by rich nations.Similar to a normal insurance fund, the money would be invested so there would be hundreds of billions of pounds available for a crisis.The fund would pay out according to the level of damage incurred.The insurance would be for nations that are affected by global warming and do not have the capacity to protect themselves.The countries would have to first take reasonable preventive measures, such as building coastal defences, so that the money was only used for extreme events.Aosis, which represents more than 40 nations, is calling for the insurance fund to be part of any global deal on climate change.British officials said it was too early to make an insurance fund part of a global agreement. But they agreed that the UN should order an investigation into the issue.