 Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, August 31, 2010SCIENTISTS PINPOINT FAILINGS IN UN CLIMATE PANELMatthew MooreTHE UN body charged with monitoring global warming must change its management policies to prevent conflicts of interest from undermining public confidence in its work, according to a report.An independent investigation into the work of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) noted "troubling" loopholes that allowed senior figures to take paid roles in the green movement.Dr Rajendra Pachauri, the chairman of the IPCC, has been accused of compromising his position by also working as an environmental consultant.The report by the InterAcademy Council, a grouping of the world's most highly regarded science organisations, identified a number of procedural management failings at the IPCC.It highlighted the role held by Dr Pachauri as needing particular scrutiny. As well as being the head of the IPCC, he is a director of The Energy and Resources Institute (TERI), a consultancy that has advised Indian energy companies and multi-national firms on how to reduce their emissions.Dr Pachauri, who is serving his second term as unpaid chairman of the IPCC, has faced repeated calls to resign, most notably following the incorrect claim that the Himalayan glaciers could melt by 2035. Questions over IPCC policies and management led to the Inter-Academy Council's investigation."It was beyond our charge to review the conflict of interest controversies that have been reported in the press," said Prof Harold Shapiro, the chairman of the investigating committee. "But we did note that the lack of a conflict of interest policy was troubling to many of the stakeholders we heard from."Operating under the public microscope the way IPCC does requires strong leadership, the continued and enthusiastic participation of distinguished scientists, an ability to adapt, and a commitment to openness if the value of these assessments to society is to be maintained."Following criticism that the position of chairman was too powerful, the report also suggested that no chairman should be allowed to serve more than one term. It did not comment on whether Dr Pachauri should be able to serve out his second term.Dr Benny Peiser, the director of the Global Warming Policy Foundation, a think tank that challenges the mainstream scientific view that global warming is the result of human activity, said Dr Pachauri was now "damaged goods"."The criticism of the management process is quite severe," he said. "It is an indirect call for Dr Pachauri to step down."Dr Pachauri has stood up in the past against what he has called "ideologically driven" attacks on the IPCC, and insisted that he has always made clear to the panel that he has another role as a director of TERI. He said: "The IPCC will be strengthened by the IAC review and by others of its kind this year. We already have the highest confi-dence in the science behind our assessments."The IAC report also said that the IPCC needed to improve its communications.One of the world's most prominent climate change sceptics has shifted his stance on the severity of the threat. Bj&#xF8;rn Lomborg, a selfstyled "sceptical environmentalist" urged governments to set up a $100billion (GBP64billion) fund to fight the effects of global warming. His new book argues the issue is "undoubtedly one of the chief concerns facing the world today".Editorial Comment: Page 19The claims Evidence that has been disputed by scepticsClimate change sceptics have seized on a number of claims put forward by the IPCC: Glaciers The most serious mistake the IPCC made was asserting that the Himalayan glaciers could disappear by 2035. The claim was traced back to an interview with a scientist published in a leading magazine in 1999, although some think it could have been confusion over a previous figure that gave the date as 2350.Sea levels in Holland The report said 55 per cent of the Netherlands was vulnerable to flooding because it was situated below sea level. In fact, only 26 per cent of the country is at risk because it is below sea level, although more than half is prone to flooding because of the sea and rivers. The mistake was traced back to information given by the Dutch environment agency. The Amazon The IPCC claimed that up to 40 per cent of the Amazonian forests could be badly affected by global warming. The claim was tracked back to a report by WWF and the IPCC was criticised for using environmental groups as sources. The claim continues to be contested.In the hot seat A controversial chairmanRajendra Pachauri, the chairman of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), is under the spotlight again following the latest criticism of his organisation.The Indian has been chairman since 2002, renewing his initial six-year term in 2008.The unpaid, part-time job makes him one of the world's most powerful men.The former railway engineer was first pushed into the limelight when he was forced to admit that a report by the IPCC in 2007, that made the case for man-made global warming, contained a serious error -- namely that Himalayan glaciers could melt by 2035.Dr Pachauri then came under scrutiny because of his other role leading The Energy Research Institute (Teri), a think tank promoting sustainable development.Questions were raised about "conflicts of interest", because of his business links to carbon trading companies. However he was cleared of any financial wrongdoing by an independent review.The 70 year-old has also hit the headlines for "steamy novels" he wrote while travelling the world in his demanding job.The latest report into the IPCC does not look at individuals.But it does recommend that the chairman should serve only one sixyear term. It also called for checks on conflicts of interest by board members.Asked if he would consider resigning if requested to, Dr Pachauri told reporters he would abide by any decision the IPCC made.