Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, August 25, 2010CLIMATE CHANGE ACTIVISTS 'SHOULD PAY POLICE BILL'Auslan CrambCLIMATE change activists who broke the law during protests in Edinburgh should pay part of the estimated GBP100,000 bill for policing the demonstration, it was claimed yesterday.Councillor Iain Whyte, convenor of the Lothian and Borders Police Board, said the final bill for policing the fiveday Climate Camp outside the headquarters of the Royal Bank of Scotland (RBS) could be even higher.He also claimed that meeting the cost of the event against a backdrop of reduced public sector funding could result in service cuts.Cllr Whyte added: "There have been a lot of police officers involved and that will have included a lot of overtime and additional costs to bring in support from surrounding forces."Police arrested a total of 18 protesters during the camp, including 12 detained in a day of "mass action" at different sites in Edinburgh on Monday.Several incidents caused disruption to motorists and bank customers.The protesters, who labelled the RBS group a "climate criminal" over its funding of fossil fuel companies, targeted two main roads, RBS branches and two energy firms.Some of the 500 activists at the camp also clashed with police following a tense standoff on Monday night.Cllr Whyte said: "Where there are options to go to the people who have put on the event, where they've not co-operated with the police, where they've deliberately gone out of their way to be disruptive, and to do damage to property in the city, then we should be seeking to recover costs if that's at all possible."I don't see why the people of Edinburgh, and the wider Lothian and Borders, should have their policing service reduced in future years because some protesters come here and choose to take illegal action."Cllr Whyte said it looked likely that the board would have to foot the bill using reserves meant for unforeseen emergencies.He added that, at a time when public sector budgets were being cut by 25 per cent over the next four years, any added cost was a strain on the board's resources.However, a spokesman for the climate camp said the "cost of climate change" would far exceed the cost of any policing operation, adding: "That's the cost I think most people are worried about."Stephen Hester, chief executive of RBS, said that in a democratic society peaceful protest was a right.He added: "Everyone has the right to express their views in the right way and certainly on climate issues we are more than cognisant of those issues, of the transitions being made in the whole world economy towards more sustainable economic development in all ways."Five climate change protesters were granted bail yesterday after pleading not guilty to charges at Edinburgh sheriff court. They were released on condition that they left Edinburgh by 7pm last night and did not enter the city unless attending court or meeting their solicitor.Giovanna Speciale, 38, and Tim Gee, 25, both from London, and Cara Whelan, from Caredigion, Wales, denied breach of the peace and Eleanor Smith, 24, from London, denied painting graffiti on bins belonging to the bank. Martin Wallace, 58, from France, denied assaulting Sgt Kevin Storey of Lothian and Borders Police on August 22 and assaulting unknown officers on the same day.