ge

Climate-Smart DevelopmentAdding up the benefits of actions that help build prosperity, end poverty and combat climate change
nd, and Deborah Wetzel.

Glossary of Keywords and Phrases
CLIMATE-SMART DEVELOPMENT
Anthropogenic: Human-caused.
Black Carbon (BC): A small, dark particle that warms the earth’s climate. Although black carbon is a particle rather than a greenhouse gas, it is the second-largest climate warmer after carbon dioxide. Unlike carbon dioxide, black carbon is quickly washed out and can be eliminated from the atmosphere if emissions stop. Reductions would also improve human health.
Carbon Dioxide (CO2): The greenhouse gas that contributes the most to global warming. While more than half of the CO2 emitted is removed from the atmosphere within a century, some fraction (about 20 percent) of emitted CO2 remains in the atmosphere for many thousands of years.
Global Burdens of Disease: A study to estimate the number of worldwide deaths annually from different diseases or environ- mental causes; can also be divided into different regions and groups. See http://www.healthmetricsandevaluation.org/gbd.
Global Public Goods Benefits: Benefits such as protection of ecosystem services, reduced acid deposition and infrastructure loss, and reduced climate change impacts that are realized beyond the jurisdiction where a policy is implemented or a project carried out.
Hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs): Chemical replacements for ozone- depleting substances being phased out by the Montreal Protocol. These substances are used in heating and cooling systems and as aerosols. Although less damaging to the ozone layer than what they replace, they can have very large global warming potentials.
Local Socioeconomic Benefits: Benefits such as GDP growth, employment gains, reduced energy and fuel costs, time savings, improved water and air quality, higher crop yields, improved public health, and reduced mortality that are realized in the jurisdiction that enacts the policy or project.
Methane (CH4): A greenhouse gas that only lasts an average of 12 years in the atmosphere; it is an extremely powerful warmer during that period. One molecule of methane warms about 25 times more than CO2 over 100 years (and 72 times as much over 20 years).
Mitigation: Actions to address climate change by decreasing greenhouse gases and other climate-forcing agents.
Ozone (O3): A harmful pollutant and greenhouse gas that only forms though complex chemical reactions with other substances in the atmosphere (e.g., methane); it can harm human health and crops.
Radiative Forcing: A measure of the net change in the energy balance of the earth with space; that is, the incoming solar radiation minus outgoing terrestrial radiation. At the global scale, the annual average radiative forcing is measured at the top of the atmosphere, or tropopause. Expressed in units of warming rate (watts, W) per unit of area (meters squared, m2).
Short-lived Forcers or Short-lived Climate Pollutants (SLCPs):
Substances such as methane, black carbon, tropospheric ozone, and some hydrofluorocarbons that have a significant impact on near-term climate change and a relatively short lifespan in the atmosphere compared to carbon dioxide and other longer-lived gases.
Synergistic Economic Benefits: Macroeconomic benefits from multiplier effects, forward linkage of investment, and potential cross-sector interactions; for example, indirect health and agriculture benefits that would result from the electrification of the transport sector if the power sector simultaneously reduced its carbon intensity and co-pollutant emissions due to a performance standard or a renewable energy mandate.
Systems Approach: An approach capturing the direct and indirect benefits of policies and projects and quantifying their macroeconomic impacts; it is meant to capture the interconnectedness between identified benefits.
Tropospheric Ozone: Sometimes called ground-level ozone, this refers to ozone that is formed or resides in the portion of the atmosphere from the earth’s surface up to the tropopause (the lowest 10–20 km of the atmosphere).
Foreword

The evidence is clear that climate change is already hurting the poor. It is damaging infrastructure, threatening coastal cities, and depressing crop yields, as well as changing our oceans, jeopardizing fish stocks, and endangering sped es.    The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) has shown more clearly than ever before that climate change is real, and that it has impacted every continent and all oceans. Consecutive IPCC reports make dear that we are ill-prepared to manage the risks of climate change and the impact it brings, and that global emissions of greenhouse gases are rising faster than ever before, despite reduction efforts.    No one will escape the impact. Climate change poses a severe risk to global economic stability. Without urgent mitigation action, ending extreme poverty by 2030 will not be possible    Al the World Bank Group, we know it doesn’t have to be like this. We believe it is possible to reduce emissions and deliver jobs and economic opportunity, while also cutting health care and energy costs. This report provides powerful evidence in support of that view This publication,  highlights scalable development solutions and builds on research to quantify the social benefits of climate action. The report simulates case studies of policies that could lead to emission reductions in three sectors: transportation, industry, and the energy efficiency of buildings.    It also describes the national-level impact that scaling-up development solutions could have in five large countries and the European Union. If enacted together, these policies could reduce greenhouse gas emissions by the same amount as taking two billion cars off the streets.    The report also looks at four country-specific projects and the impact they would have if scaled-up nationwide For example, if India built 1,000 kilometers of new bus rapid transit lanes in about twenty large cities, the benefits over 20 years would include more than 27,000 lives saved from reduced accidents and air pollution, and 128,000 long-term jobs created. It would also have large, positive effects on India’s GDP, its agriculture, and the global climate.   Climate-Smart Development is a collaboration with the Climate- Works Foundation, and provides a framework to better understand the climate risks and benefits in everything we do. The report’s findings show clearly that development done well can deliver significant climate benefits.    I recommend this publication to policy makers and development practitioners alikePresident, World Bank Group

Executive Summary

Officials responsible for a nation’s economy have been primarily concerned with delivering jobs, stimulating growth, and promoting competitiveness. They are also becoming worried about the effects climate change will inflict on their country’s economic future. Increasingly, these officials want to know if there are investments and efforts that can advance urgent development priorities and, at the same time address the challenges of our rapidly warming world.    Thanks to a growing body of research, it is now clear that climate-smart development can boost employment and can save millions of lives. Smart development policies and projects can also slow the pace of adverse climate changes. Based on this new scientific understanding, and with the development of new economic modeling tools to quantify these benefits, it is clear that the objectives of economic development and climate protection can be complementary.    This report uses new modeling tools to examine the full range of benefits ambitious climate mitigation policies can produce across the transportation, industry and building sectors in the United States, China, the European Union, India, Mexico and Brazil. This report also describes the multiple benefits of four development project simulations scaled up to the national level.    The report builds on recent efforts to estimate the development benefits1 that come with a reduction in climate pollutants. These include economic growth, new jobs, improved crop yields, enhanced energy security, healthier people, and millions of lives saved. In many cases these benefits accrue quickly, and they accrue locally, primarily in the nation where action is taken.Why emissions matterClimate change impacts impose undeniable burdens on economic development by causing significant damage to agriculture, water resources, ecosystems, infrastructure, and human health. These impacts are proving to be devastating for the world’s most vulnerable populations.    Emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases must be substantially reduced to keep the world from exceeding the 2° Celsius threshold of global warming.2 While efforts to reduce these climate pollutants, despite some progress, have been slow, recent scientific evidence suggests that cutting so-called “short-lived climate pollutants,” which are responsible for up to 40 percent of the current warming, can have immediate climate impacts.3 Complementary actions on greenhouse gases and short-lived climate pollutants can slow the rate of near-term warming, push back dangerous tipping points4 and provide time to allow the world’s poorest people to adapt to the changing climate.    Among the short-lived climate pollutants, black carbon and methane are climate forcers but they are also air pollutants that injure human health and diminish agriculture production. By reducing them, it is possible to prevent the deaths of 2.4 million people and boost crop production by 32 million tons of crops that would have been lost each year.5 In rural areas, millions of people can be saved from premature death by switching to clean cooking solutions. In cities, commuters can save time, and many thousands of asthma and heart attacks can be alleviated, through improved transit systems. Limiting these pollutants through smart development enhances economies, stimulates production, leaves populations healthier and slows the rate of climate change.Achieving development and climate goals simultaneouslyPolicies that reduce GHG emissions and other short-lived climate pollutants can have clear economic, health, and other social benefits. For example, a policy that encourages more efficient transportation—including fuel efficient vehicles, and effective public transit—will save fuel and time which improves energy security and labor productivity. These policies can also reduce smog-related respiratory problems, thus saving lives, and improve visibility, benefiting local investment in sectors such as tourism and recreation. Similarly, a project to improve solid waste management may initially be pursued for its sanitation and health benefits; it can also reduce methane emissions that may boost crop yields and save energy. All these gains directly contribute to economic growth.    At the project level, these benefits have often been left out of economic analyses because many health and environmental benefits were not easily quantifiable. This has left decision makers with analyses that are incomplete. Recent efforts to better estimate the full impacts of proposed development projects have produced several new analytical tools and models. With these new tools, economists can more fully assess the multiple impacts of pollutants and estimate the value of emission reductions. Today’s tools can also model the synergistic impacts of harms and benefits as they flow through the economy.A framework to assess benefitsThis report attempts to quantify investments that represent a true economic gain in terms of increased economic productivity.6 It does so by applying new modeling tools that give a fuller accounting of the benefits of near-term and long-term climate and development interventions. The report:• Introduces a holistic, adaptable framework to capture and measure the multiple benefits of reducing emissions of several pollutants• Demonstrates how local and national policymakers, members of the international development community, and others can use this framework to design and analyze policies and projects
• Contributes a compelling rationale for effectively combining climate action with sustainable development and green growth worldwide    The report responds to demand from countries that are striving to advance local development priorities and needs for resilient, low carbon growth. By looking at policies and projects more holistically, one can better assess the overall value of actions that reduce emissions of GHGs and short-lived climate pollutants, and provide a more compelling case for coordinated development and climate action.    The report proposes the following framework to analyze policies and projects:1. Identify the full range of benefits that result from a project or policy, including improved health, crop yields, energy savings, job growth, labor productivity, and economic growth2. Select appropriate assessment tools that provide insight on each measurable benefit3. Choose the appropriate macroeconomic tool to analyze direct and synergistic economic benefits4. Estimate the full range of benefits and present results using metrics relevant to the audience    Several simulated case studies are used in this study to demonstrate how to apply this analytical framework. The case studies cover multiple pollutants (particulate matter, primarily black carbon; and GHGs, including methane, a precursor to ozone, and C02) and multiple sectors (transportation, industry, buildings, waste, and agriculture). They demonstrate the frameworks’ benefits from two perspectives: sector policies applied at the national or regional level, and projects implemented at the sub-national level. By applying the framework to analyze both types of interventions, the report demonstrates the value of this approach for national and local policymakers, international finance organizations, and others.    The report focuses on assessing the multiple benefits of simulated policy and project case studies. These analyses should be viewed as “full implementation simulations”7 relative to a business-as-usual scenario. The benefits quantified have an optimistic bias because they do not necessarily include transaction costs, risks, market distortions, and other factors that would be included in a policy implementation evaluation. Nonetheless, they offer an important building block to refine the approaches, methods, and tools for multiple-benefit analysis. The results also highlight the need to fine-tune the modeling tools to represent real-world conditions more accurately.Case studies demonstrate sizeable benefitsThree simulated case studies analyzed the effects of key sector policies to determine the benefits realized in six regions® (the United States, China, the European Union, India, Mexico, and Brazil) and the impact on global GDP. The sector policies include regulations, taxes, and incentives to stimulate a shift to clean transport, improved industrial energy efficiency, and more energy efficient buildings and appliances.    The annual benefits3 of just these policies in 203 0 include an estimated GDP growth of between $1.8 trillion and $2.6 trillion. Approximately 04,000 premature pollution-related deaths could be avoided. Additionally, the policies would avoid production of 8.5 billion metric tons of carbon dioxide equivalent (CCX.e)10 emissions and almost 16 billion kilowatt-hours of energy saved, a savings roughly equivalent to taking 2 billion cars off the road. These policies alone would account for 30 percent of the total reduction needed in 2030 to limit global warming to 2°C.U Figure E.l illustrates annual benefits for three case studies in 2030 for key sectors.    This report also presents results of four simulated case studies that analyzed several sub-national development projects, scaled up to the national level, to determine the additional benefits (beyond the economic net present value typically calculated in project financial analysis) over the life of each project, generally 20 years. Four project simulations were studied: expanded bus rapid transit in India, integrated solid waste management in Brazil, cleaner cook stoves in rural China, and táo gas digestion and solar photovoltaics in Mexican agriculture.    The aggregate benefits over the life of the projects are estimated to include more than 1 million lives saved, about 1 million-1.5 million tons of a op losses avoided, and some 200,000 jobs created. These projects could reduce C02e emissions by 355 million-520 million metric tons, roughly equivalent to shutting down 100-150 coal-fired power plants. This equates to about $100 billion-$134 billion in additional value for just three of these projects in India, Brazil, and Mexico when accounting for health benefits, avoided crop losses, GDP benefits, and the social benefits of carbon mitigation (beyond direct project benefits such as the value of carbon finance assets, reduced operating costs and other project-related economic benefits). In China, the estimated value of avoided premature death alone would come to more than $1 trillion. Figure E.2 illustrates potential benefits for four project simulations scaled to the national level. 8 9 10 11
    Many development efforts—across a range of sectors—hold the promise of economic growth as borne out by economic analysis. Activities that also reduce emissions—across a range of pollutants—deliver health, agriculture and other socioeconomic benefits that are integral to a broader development agenda. Quantifying and including these benefits, where possible, can reveal the broader socioeconomic value of projects while enhancing the case for climate mitigation. Given the rising cost of inaction on climate change, it is imperative that the broad benefits of smart development be included in economic analyses.    As a result of limitations in the framework and available modeling tools, this report does not provide project-level evaluation for decision making nor does it focus on policy implementation issues or costs, which are required for comprehensive policy evaluation.12 The report does however highlight areas where additional research could improve limitations with the framework. For example, improved tools are needed to account for behavioral changes such as shifting to public transit and advanced cookstoves, and to explicitly account for the full climate change costs of emissions.13 The framework also needs additional work to tailor its application at the individual project level. Areas for research include:• Further benefits assessments based on more comprehensive emissions data• Multi-sector macroeconomic analysis that better illustrates the synergistic benefits (for example, using cleaner energy sources to supply the increased power demand for electric cars could yield greater benefits than clean transport or clean power in isolation)• Additional macroeconomic analysis to reflect the additional benefits of green versus non-green investment options    As scientists continue to clarify the many ways that local air pollution, short-lived climate pollutants, and greenhouse gases harm health, welfare, and the environment, the framework presented in this report can be honed to better account for these costs by providing more complete economic analyses.    Ultimately, climate change is an issue for the whole economy and all facets of development. All policy makers, whether in government cabinets or corporate boardrooms, need to understand where they can get development and climate benefits from the decisions they make. Similarly, those charged with informing decisions from a climate perspective need to able to present more complete analysis and evidence of the broad impacts of their projects and policies.

Introduction

BackgroundClimate change is a fundamental threat to sustainable economic development, with devastating impacts on agriculture, water resources, ecosystems, and human health. Immediate, substantial reductions in C02 and other long-lived GHGs are needed to avoid a 4°C warmer world (UNEP 2011a). While every region will be affected, those least able to adapt—the poor and most vulnerable-will be hit hardest.    The large and dominant role of C02 emissions in raising global average temperature remains unchanged; understanding of the effects of greenhouse gases and other pollutants on the climate system, however, is improving. Other pollutants—namely methane (CH4), ozone (03), black carbon (BC), and some hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), collectively referred to as short-lived climate pollutants (SLCPs)—are now recognized for their potency and as a significant cause of global warming (Methane and HFCs are included in the Kyoto protocol). Although these pollutants have a much shorter lifetime14 in the atmosphere than C02, recent estimates indicate that SLCPs may be responsible for 30-40 percent of overall present-day global warming (Molina et al. 2009; Bond et al. 2013). Reducing emissions of SLCPs now could reduce warming by up to 0.6°C by 2050 (Hu et al. 2013; UNEP 2011a and b; Shindell et al. 2012) and avoid or delay potentially dangerous “tipping points” in important climatic systems (Molina et al. 2009).    To avoid the long-term threat of climate change, the world must still reduce C02 emissions. But reducing SLCP emissions could slow the rate of warming over the next two to four decades, providing time for the poor and vulnerable to adapt to a changing climate.
SLCPs Damage Health and CropsThe opportunity to mitigate near-term warming is only one reason to reduce SLCP emissions. In addition, air pollution15 imposes an undeniable burden on development and threatens many emerging economies (World Bank 2013d). The United Nations Environment Programme (UNEP) estimates that fast action to reduce emissions of SLCPs could avoid an estimated 2.4 million premature deaths from outdoor air pollution annually by 2030 and about 32 million tons of crop losses per year.16    A growing body of scientific literature analyzing the effects of air pollution on health and agricultural activities is rapidly emerging. Observational and modeling studies indicate that outdoor air pollution results in more than 3 million deaths annually, with another 3.5 million or more deaths attributed to household-related air pollution (Lim et al. 2012; Silva et al. 2013; Fang et al. 2013; Avnery et al. 2013). In addition, these and other studies have documented that hundreds of millions of metric tons of crop losses could be avoided each year by reducing emissions. Reducing emissions of BC and methane (which aids in the formation of tropospheric ozone) can provide significant development benefits, including improved health and increased agricultural yields (UNEP/WMO 2011). Annex A explores this literature more fully.
    Crucially, the health benefits of reducing black carbon emissions (especially from biomass cookstoves and transport in Asia and Africa) would be realized immediately and almost entirely in the regions that reduce their emissions. China and India especially will reap the benefits of some reductions, such as reduced background ozone, because of their large populations and agricultural sectors.Emissions: Sources, Impacts, and Reduction MethodsEmissions are often categorized by how long they persist in the atmosphere.    Long-lived greenhouse gases include carbon dioxide, nitrous oxide, and some HFCs. C02is naturally present in the atmosphere; it is also emitted from burning fossil fuels and biomass, and by certain chemical reactions (e.g., cement manufacturing). Nitrous oxide (N20) is emitted from agricultural, transportation, and industrial sources; its impact on health and agriculture is limited in the examples in this report. Hydrofluorocarbons are used in heating and cooling systems and aerosols; because HFCs do not contribute to health or crop damage, their emissions are not covered in this report.17    SLCPs include methane, black carbon, and some other HFCs. Methane is released as a fugitive emission from oil and gas production and distribution, agriculture (including livestock and rice farming), decomposition of municipal solid waste, and other sources. In addition to its warming effect, methane leads to the formation of ground-level ozone, a component of smog, which can cause significant crop damage, respiratory illnesses, and other harmful impacts. BC comes from incomplete combustion of carbon-rich fuel; it is a component of particulate matter and is a risk factor for cardiopulmonary disease and can trigger asthma, heart attacks, and strokes.    Greenhouse gas emissions are usually measured as carbon dioxide equivalents (C02e).Win-win OpportunitiesMany projects and policies offer the opportunity to control C02 and SLCP emissions simultaneously; doing so can deliver both local socioeconomic benefits and global climate benefits, and reduce the net cost of action to mitigate climate change.18    Several studies indicate the multiple possible synergies that can be achieved by combining measures that address climate change with efforts to improve air quality or energy security (West et al. 2013; Bollen et al. 2009; Shindell et al. 2012). These studies conclude that the multiple benefits of a package of controls are often greater than the individual benefits considered separately; these benefits can reduce the marginal cost when controls are implemented together. They also demonstrate that efforts to reduce SLCP emissions can improve public health, reduce crop losses, and slow the rate of near-term climate change, thereby aiding sustainable development. Recent studies indicate that reducing emissions of BC and methane may also help reduce sea-level rise (Hu et al. 2013).    Recent work by the World Bank (2013b) in India finds that the combined cost of outdoor and indoor air pollution is more than $40 billion annually, or more than three percent of India’s 2009 GDP. When other environmental degradation is factored in, including crop, water, pasture, and forest damage, the total is closer to 5.7 percent of India’s GDP. This mostly affects the poorest members of society.    The growing recognition of SLCPs’ deleterious effects on climate, health, agriculture, and the environment suggests that capturing many of these “externalities” can strengthen the economic rationale for projects or policies that reduce SLCPs.New Modeling Tools Enable More Holistic PlanningNew methods and tools for capturing multi-pollutant health, agricultural, and environmental benefits allow for expanded economic analysis that more fully accounts for their monetary value. These tools translate the estimated emissions reductions from interventions in various energy systems (using engineering systems models) into changes in atmospheric concentrations (using chemical transport models) and estimate health and agricultural benefits (via concentration-response models and valuation tools).    Two innovative programs helped usher in these modern, synergistic, multi-pollutant air quality and energy planning tools: the European Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution and the U.S. market-based approach to controlling acid rain under the Clean Air Act, where advanced economic efficiency is a major driver of the design of air quality management programs (see Box B-l in Annex B).    The continued integration of energy, economic, and air quality planning has resulted in a new breed of tools19 that, when linked together, provide comprehensive benefits calculations, often with monetized value as an output. The advent of these tools enables broader economic analysis of émissions-réduction programs, including improved internalization of externalities than was previously feasible. This report explicitly focuses on expanding benefits analysis, as others (for example, Paltsev and Capros 2013) have already explored the subject from the cost perspective.Objectives of this ReportThis report describes efforts by the ClimateWorks Foundation and the World Bank to quantify the multiple economic, social, and environmental benefits associated with policies and projects to reduce emissions in select sectors and regions. The report has three objectives:• To develop a holistic, adaptable framework to capture and measure the multiple benefits of reducing emissions of several pollutants.• To demonstrate how local and national policymakers, members of the international development community, and others can use this framework to design and analyze policies and projects.• To contribute a compelling rationale for effectively combining climate action with sustainable development and green growth worldwide.    By using a systems approach20 to analyze policies and projects, this work illustrates ways to capitalize on synergies between efforts to reduce emissions and spur development, minimize costs, and maximize societal benefits.    This report uses several case studies to demonstrate how to apply the analytical framework. The case studies approach this analysis from two perspectives: sector policies applied at the national or regional level and development projects implemented at the sub-national level. The sector policy case studies are based on ClimateWorks’ portfolio analysis. The development project case studies are based on World Bank-financed projects, scaled up to the national level. By applying the framework to analyze both types of interventions, this report demonstrates the efficacy of this approach for national and local policymakers, international finance organizations, and others.    These case studies show that climate change mitigation and air quality protection can be integral to effective development efforts and can provide a net economic benefit. Quantifying the benefits of climate action can facilitate support from constituencies interested in public health and food and energy security; it can also advance the international discussion of effective ways to address climate change while pursuing green growth.Report StructureThe current chapter provides background information on the pollutants covered in this report and identifies opportunities to achieve both (local) socioeconomic and (global) climate objectives by reducing emissions. It also introduces new modeling tools that enable broader economic analysis of émissions-réduction programs. Chapter 2 explains how these tools can be combined to develop an effective framework to analyze policies and projects. Chapter 3 demonstrates the framework, using several policy- and project- based case studies to estimate the multiple benefits of emissions reductions from a regional or national level. Finally, Chapter 4 explores the challenges to operationalizing the framework and presents conclusions from the study.
New Framework to Estimate Benefits

The analysis presented in this report uses recently developed emissions modeling and assessment tools and an integrated macroeconomic model. Prior analyses added some environmental externalities into cost-benefit analyses by quantifying and monetizing specific benefits and adding them individually to the benefits side of the ledger. The framework proposed here advances this work by taking a systems approach, integrating multiple benefits into a macroeconomic model to demonstrate the additional benefits that can accrue—in terms of GDP and employment—as the benefits flow through the economy. All of these benefits are not routinely captured in cost-benefit approaches; new tools make it possible, however, to include many of them in project and policy analyses where emissions can be quantified.Benefits FrameworkThe framework to assess the multiple benefits of projects and policies to reduce emissions of GHGs and SLCPs follows these steps:1. Identify the full range of benefits: These should include all potential benefits that result from a project or policy, including:a. Local socioeconomic benefits—such as GDP growth, employment gains, reduced energy and fuel costs, time savings, improved water and air quality, higher crop yields, improved public health, and reduced mortality—that are realized in the jurisdiction that enacts the policy or undertakes the project.b. 
Global public goods benefits—such as protection of ecosystem services, reduced acid deposition and infrastructure loss, and reduced climate change impacts—that are realized beyond the jurisdiction that carries out the policy or project. For example, reduced sulfate and methane emissions can have large downwind benefits (i.e., beyond the locality that reduced the emissions).c. Combined benefits that can be realized both locally and globally. While it is important for nations to realize the local benefits of emissions control, it is equally important for them to recognize the shared benefits that accrue to them when their neighbors and other global actors reduce their emissions.2. Identify appropriate benefits assessment tools: These should include available tools that provide insight on each measurable benefit at the scale or resolution appropriate to the analysis. Selection (or development) of suitable analytical tools is critical. For example, several slightly different tools are used in this report for individual case studies, but entirely different tools may be used as long as they adequately assess the relevant benefits. Those benefits that cannot be quantitatively assessed should be qualitatively described and included in economic analysis.3. Identify an appropriate macroeconomic tool: This model should enable analysis of economic benefits across sectors and types of benefits. For example, health or agricultural benefits may have a positive effect on other areas of the economy (e.g. labor productivity, household disposable income); energy savings in one sector might benefit another sector (e.g. by reducing energy costs and the investment needed to supply energy).
4. Estimate significant benefits: Appropriate metrics should be used to measure significant benefits, and the results should be presented so that they are meaningful to the audience they affect. For example, while economic effects might best be presented in monetary terms for policymakers, talking about the impact on cardiovascular health might be more relevant to health officials. Similarly, presenting benefits in terms of crop yields is likely to resonate more with farmers.    This framework is consistent with the World Bank’s paradigm of “inclusive green growth” (World Bank 2012b) in that it recognizes the limitations of traditional cost-benefit analysis and attempts to supplement it by quantifying additional benefits to more completely demonstrate the value of green growth strategies. Because different benefits resonate with different audiences at the regional, national, and sub-national levels, it is worthwhile to acknowledge all the benefits in economic analysis, even if not all can be monetized.Step 1: Identify the Full Range of BenefitsThe first step in applying the framework requires consideration of all potential economic, social, and environmental benefits that a project or policy may yield at the local and global levels. Many common interventions in the energy, transportation, and building sectors are likely to have similar benefits.    For World Bank-financed development projects, socioeconomic benefits are likely to be among the primary motivations, and they should be assessed as part of routine project appraisal. All indirect economic impacts should be considered, such as multiplier and flow-through effects that result from linkages in the economy (for example, whether project investment results in greater manufacturing or construction services) or the effects of complementary economic policies (such as changes in structural relationships due to incentives for local purchases). Studies have shown that reduced traffic congestion enhances economic development (UNEP 2011c; ESCAP 2007) and improved health leads to greater labor force productivity (Sanderson et al. 2013). These economic benefits should be included in analyses; this involves reviewing potentially significant effects and ensuring they are represented appropriately in available modeling tools.    Some socioeconomic benefits are difficult to include in an economic analysis because they are not easily quantified or their assessment relies on contingent valuation methodologies (such as willingness to pay for various benefits). For emissions reduction activities, these benefits can include improved public health and higher crop yields; reduced infrastructure losses from acid rain; improved visibility (which has its own intrinsic value and reduces economic losses in the tourism, aviation. and recreation industries) ; and time savings due to new public transit. These less tangible benefits can have spillover effects on the macro-economy; for example, good urban environmental quality is important to attract and retain the talented professionals who drive wealth creation in knowledge-based economies (Florida 2000).    Environmental benefits are similarly treated as an externality in most economic analyses. As the WAVES partnership21 for Natural Capital Accounting demonstrates, however, many countries are beginning to reflect the costs of reduced ecosystems services on their national ledgers. Environmental benefits include biodiversity, ecosystem services, and reduced climate change impacts.Step 2: Identify Appropriate Benefits Assessment ToolsMany types of integrated assessment models are widely used to estimate the benefits or impacts associated with emissions reductions. For example, the partial-equilibrium Global Change Assessment Model (GCAM) models the impacts of climate change policies and technologies on GHG emissions, energy consumption, production, and the economy linked to the energy sector (Clarke et al. 2008). The Greenhouse Gas and Air Pollution Interactions and Synergies (GAINS) model is used in co-benefits studies to assess the health and ecosystem impacts of particulate pollution, acidification, eutrophication, and tropospheric ozone (Amman et al. 2008). Several other technology models also simulate anthropogenic systems and their linkage to the atmosphere, quantifying several benefits. These include top-down and bottom-up approaches, and they have evolved significantly as a result of regulatory programs that have emphasized economic efficiency (See Box B-l in Annex B).    Key features of these models include their ability to estimate the regional costs and a range of benefits of alternative emissions control strategies, and to identify cost-effective measures to achieve specified emissions reduction targets. This study used a variety of models to determine changes in emissions, in costs, and in health, agricultural, and other economic benefits.    The particular tools chosen for this study should be viewed as examples only. The World Bank’s low-carbon growth studies (ESMAP 2012) provide many other examples of methods to assess long-term mitigation potential and benefits even though the overarching goal of those studies was to reduce the emissions trajectory of growth at the country level.


Tools Used for Sector Policy Benefits AssessmentThis report relied on two models to analyze the benefits of the policy-based case studies (See Figure 2.1 and Annex B):    
Two development project case studies, on biogas digesters and improved cookstoves, relied on project experience and expert judgment to estimate emissions reductions and benefits. The focus of the analysis in all cases is to demonstrate an adaptable framework to assess benefits.

♦ Marginal abatement cost curve model (MACC). Developed by McKinsey <& Co. (Enkvist et al. 2009) with ClimateWorks support, this model estimates potential emissions reductions and associated costs. Although not as detailed as sector-specific models, it represents a unified view of the available technical measures to reduce GHG emissions or SLCPs, their emissions reduction potential (MtC02e), and the associated cost($/tCO;.e) in a specific year for different regions and countries. The abatement potential and corresponding costs are calculated relative to a business-as-usual scenario (BAU) in a given year.22 23 24 In this study, impacts in 2C80 are considered.* Fast Scenario Screening Tool (TM5-EASST). Developed by the European Commission Joint Research Centre (VanDingenen et al. 2009), this model estimates health and agricultural impacts. This model links emissions of pollutants in a given source region to downwind pollutant levels (at the national level and globally) using meteorology and atmospheric chemistry. Pollutant levels are then used to calculate impacts by applying specific dose-response functions from scientific literature. The outputs include lives saved per year from avoided cardiopulmonary, respiratory, and lung-cancer-related causes, as well as changes in agricultural yields for maize, rice, wheat, and soybean.Tools Used for Development Project Benefits AssessmentThe four development project case studies used several sector-specific tools and bottom-up analyses to estimate the benefits of the interventions, including TM5-FASST and:• Transportation Emissions Evaluation Models for Projects (TEEMP) (GEF 2010). Developed by Clean Air Asia (ADB 2013), this model quantifies emissions and multiple benefits (such as reduced accidents and travel time), and uses simplified analysis to determine the economic feasibility of a project. As a technology-oriented model, it relies on projected demand as an input rather than independently assessing the future demand for new technologies.25• Environmental .Assessment of Solid Waste Systems and Technologies (EASEWASTE). Developed by the Technical University of Denmark (Kirkeby et al. 2008), this life-cycle assessment model follows waste management from generation through collection, transportation, and treatment, and calculates the environmental emissions and impacts of alternative treatment scenarios.
Step 3: Identify an Appropriate Macroeconomic Tool For all of the case studies in this report, the outputs from the MACC, FAS ST, and other tools are fed into the Global Energy Industry Model (GEIM) from Oxford Economics, which calculates the macroeconomic implications of climate and air quality interventions. Macroeconomic models are quantitative tools routinely used to evaluate the impact of economic and policy shocks—particularly policy reforms—on the economy as a whole. These models reproduce (in a stylized manner) the structure of the whole economy, including the economic transactions among diverse agents (productive sectors, households, the government, and others). This approach is especially useful when the expected effects of policy implementation are complex and materialize through different transmission channels, as is the case with climate and energy policies. Details about the GEIM can be found in Annex B.Limitations of Bottom-up and Macroeconomic ModelingCombining bottom-up (MACC) and top-down (macroeconomic modeling) approaches has advantages and disadvantages. Bottom- up models disaggregate energy consumption across sectors and consider specific energy technologies with technical and economic parameters, but they often neglect to account for feedbacks in the economy and the effects of international energy markets. Top-down models are good at identifying complex and dynamic interactions among macroeconomic variables, but they are very aggregated and lack the level of resolution necessary to inform policymaking. Additionally, top-down macroeconomic models show only how real resources are reallocated among economic activities after the economy has “equilibrated” following a shock to the system (e.g., an oil price change) ; they generally cannot easily model the gradual uptake of new technologies. Both kinds of models depend crucially on some simplifying assumptions that do not reflect real-world conditions. This can be remedied to a certain extent by tailoring the scenarios to specific needs, but uncertainties remain that must be recognized and highlighted when presenting the results.26    Another concern with respect to economic analysis of capital investment relates to the Keynesian effects of some projects. For example, disaster reconstruction aid might generate significant economic activity with GDP benefits, but it does not improve productivity; rather it simply replaces productive capacity that was lost in a disaster. Assuming some slack in the economy, all spending will produce multiplier effects on GDP, or “Keynesian benefits.” Thus analysis must carefully distinguish any productivity benefits that result from green investment.    In this analysis, the GEIM model deals with Keynesian effects to some extent by recognizing the long-term drag on the economy caused by capital investment. Any additional investment that does not improve efficiency or expand productive capacity puts a drag on the economy in the long term. The transmission channel for this is essentially crowding out: the additional investment increases demand and, as a result, GDP and the rate of inflation; in response, the central bank raises interest rates, which causes demand (in particular investment) to fall and GDP to move back toward baseline levels. If the additional investment is large enough, it will crowd out a significant portion of capacity-expanding investment, which will in turn result in lower potential and actual output in the long run.27    To the extent that GDP rises above baseline levels in the case studies in this report, it reflects an increase in productivity or energy efficiency that results in sustainable economic development. In future analyses, it may be appropriate to compare GDP growth for a proposed intervention with the Keynesian effects associated with a default alternative project, such as the average distribution of historic public investment. The net effect would represent the benefit or cost of the proposed intervention.Step 4: Estimate and Present Significant BenefitsThe fourth step in the framework requires that the benefits are measured and presented appropriately for various audiences. This involves selecting metrics that are meaningful to the audience, and not all benefits can or should be monetized and aggregated. Economic effects should be presented in monetary terms, such as net present value or change in GDP. Specific health benefits may be more relevant to public health officials than the statistical monetized value of avoided mortalities. Tons of avoided crop losses will likely resonate most with farmers and agricultural policymakers.    The next chapter shows how this framework can be applied, and the benefits of a variety of case studies are estimated using a range of metrics. For policymakers, information on mitigation costs and benefits help identify policies that can optimize development or welfare benefits while also attaining environmental goals. For international finance and development organizations, the results of different scenarios indicate which sectors and regions stand to benefit most from financial interventions. For non-climate philanthropists and analysts, the economic, social, and environmental benefits provide insights on how emissions mitigation measures can also improve public health and food and energy security.
Multiple Benefits Assessment—Case Studies

The framework described in the preceding chapter was applied to two types of case studies to demonstrate the estimation of benefits from two perspectives: (1) sector policies applied at the national or regional level, and (2) development projects implemented at the sub-national level. By applying the framework to analyze both types of interventions, this report demonstrates the efficacy of this approach for national and local policymakers, international finance organizations, and others. A summary of the case studies is presented in this chapter, and more detailed descriptions are contained in Annex C (for sector policies) and Annex D (for development projects).Valuation Methods Used in this ReportThis report uses the following methods to monetize the benefits of climate and development action:• Value of statistical life (VSL): Adjusting for differences in income and purchasing power, the following values of statistical lives saved were established (all reported in 2010 purchasing power parity in U.S. dollars).Using methods recommended by the OECD (2011), values for OECD member countries were based on a U.S. value of $7,887,511 (U.S. EPA Guidance 2000) ;28 EU, $5,713,388 and Mexico, $3,055,289. Values for non-OECD countries were derived by averaging available estimates of locally determined VSLs:29 Brazil, $1,555,802; China, $700,635; and India, $967,998.• Crop values: For agricultural sectors, this report uses the 2010 World Bank average grain crop price of $171.8030 per ton for the crops considered (maize, wheat, rice, and soybeans) and further estimates that each metric ton of cereal contains three million kilocalories (kcal) of energy. Assuming a daily calorie need of 3,000 kilocalories of energy (kcal), this translates into about one million kcal per person per year. Hence one metric ton of cereal can feed three people for one year (Cassidy et al. 2013; Nellemann et al. 2009).• Social cost of carbon: C02 emissions reductions are valued in this report based on U.S. government estimates of the social cost of carbon, which project changes in agricultural productivity, human health, and property damage from increased flood risks.31 Due to limited data availability and uncertainty, however, this social cost of carbon does not account for all the damage caused by increased C02, and it does not explicitly account for the health and agriculture benefits of reduced SLCP emissions. This report uses the average values ($34 per ton in 2010, rising due to increased damages over time to approximately $55 per ton in 2030) obtained using discount rates of 2.5, 3, and 5 percent in 2010 dollars (U.S. Interagency Working Group on Social Cost of Carbon 2013). Benefits derived using the 3 percent discount rate are presented in the main text for illustration, but sensitivity to other social discount rates is presented in the annexes.
• Carbon finance value: GHG reductions can help finance certain projects through the sale of certified emissions reductions in various carbon markets, such as the Clean Development Mechanism (CDM) and the EU Emissions Trading System. The value of the emissions reduction is determined by individual market conditions and does not reflect the full value to society.• C02 mitigation cost: The cost per ton of avoided C02 emissions is determined by the MACC model.• Effect on GDP: The macroeconomic impacts of the multiple benefits as they flow through the economy are calculated using the GEIM model. A discount rate of 10 percent is used (consistent with Belli et al. 1998) within the GEIM macroeconomic calculations. However, social discount rates of 2.5, 3, and 5 percent were used to calculate the net present value of GDP and other socioeconomic benefits. Again, the central value of 3 percent was used for illustrative purposes in the main text, but sensitivity to the other social discount rates is presented in the annexes.• Project benefits: The stated benefits of World Bank-financed development projects are calculated as the net present value of the stream of annual benefits less costs over the life of a project (scaled to the national level for the case studies presented). These stated benefits might include new revenue streams (such as fees collected) and cost savings (such as reduced energy or transit costs).• Energy savings: The monetized values for energy savings are obtained by assuming a price of oil of $80/barrel in 2010 dollars, in accordance with the scenario assumptions of MACC 3.0 (see Annex C) and applying the following equivalences: 1 GWh = 8.6e~5 Mtoe and 1 Mtoe = 7.33 Mboe (IEA, BP). This is a rather crude, imprecise estimate, but it is nonetheless useful in providing an order of magnitude of the monetary savings associated with the emission reductions in each case study.Sector Policy Case StudiesThe case studies presented below analyze three key sector policy interventions needed to address the mitigation gap identified by UNEP (2013). They describe policy changes, including regulations, incentives, and taxes, to stimulate specific measures30 to cut emissions from three sectors: transportation, industry, and buildings relative to a “no new policy” baseline scenario.31 The analysis includes impacts in five countries and one region—China, India, the EU, the U.S., Mexico, and Brazil (subsequently, for simplicity, referred to in this report as “six regions”)—plus the impact on global GDP. This analysis refers to the U.S. and the E.U. as developed countries and to China, India, Mexico, and Brazil as emerging economies. The case studies use the MACC model to identify all quantified opportunities to reduce emissions of C02 with a mitigation cost below $80/tCO2e32 33 34 35 (Spiegel and Bresch 2013; Dinkel et al. 2011).    These mitigation costs are defined as the incremental cost of a low-emission technology compared with the reference case, measured in $/tC02e. These costs include two key components: (1) the annualized repayments for capital expenditure (CapEx), or the additional investments in new technology or replacement infrastructure necessary to achieve the GHG emission reductions, and (2) the operational costs or savings (OpEx), fuel- and nonfuel-related, associated with each abatement opportunity. The abatement costs can therefore be interpreted as pure project costs incurred to install and operate each low-emitting technology. Other key elements—transaction costs, communication/information costs, subsidies or explicit C02 costs, taxes, and the economic impacts of investing significantly in low-emitting technology (such as advantages from technology leadership)—are deliberately excluded from the cost calculations.    Since data is only available for black carbon and methane, the health and agricultural benefits estimated here are conservative.36 They therefore have a negligible impact on the economy relative to the size of the economy and the labor force. A future study (see footnote 52 in Annex C) will examine similar benefits for mitigating a larger suite of pollutants.    As described in the prior chapter, the quantified SLCP emission reductions from the MACC model are fed into the TM5-FASST tool to model the resulting health and agricultural impacts in 2030 (see Annex C for the 2020 values). Although the impacts are mostly seen in the regions where emissions are reduced, downwind impacts in other regions are also observed. These emissions reductions and impacts, including reduced mortality and decreased crop damage, are fed into the GEIM. The resulting outputs include changes in GDP and employment. The “transmission channels”37 and results are summarized below.    Each sector policy case study analyzes the macroeconomic results of two scenarios in order to estimate the lower and upper bounds of possible effects of the policy interventions.Scenario 1 makes two key assumptions:a. Self-financed transition: Each country pays for the full costs of the transformations required to reduce GHG emissions.b. No technology transfer: Developed countries produce all the new (cleaner, more efficient) technology needed to transform each sector, which boosts their exports and emerging markets import the necessary technology.Scenario 2 is similar to Scenario 1 but makes different assumptions:a. International climate finance: Developed countries pay for 60 percent of the capital expenditures incurred by emerging economies to reduce GHG emissions on a prorata basis depending on their GDP.b. Accelerated technology transfer: Emerging economies produce 80-100 percent of the new (cleaner, more efficient) technology needed to transform each sector, while developed countries produce 100 percent of their own technology.    Results are categorized as global or local benefits. As explained in Chapter 2, global public goods benefits include reduced climate change impacts and the transboundary benefits of reduced emissions; local socioeconomic benefits include health and other benefits realized within the five focus countries and one region that reduce emissions. Changes to GDP are presented on a global basis. The social value of carbon is based on the social cost of carbon explained above, using a 3 percent discount rate. Values for different discount rates are shown in Annex C. For monetizing global value of lives saved, the VSL for India is used as most of the global total is found in the South Asian region.Sector Policy Case Study 1 : Shift to Clean TransportGHG emissions from the transportation sector account for about 13 percent of global total; of that, emissions from road transport account for about 80 percent of total transport emissions. These numbers highlight the opportunity for governments and the private sector to work together to reduce the carbon intensity of transportation.
Case Study InterventionsThis case study includes the following changes:• Improving the fuel efficiency of internal combustion engine vehicles.  • Shifting to hybrid and electric vehicles.• Transitioning to low-carbon fuels such as bio-ethanol for medium- and heavy-duty vehicles.• Increasing government investment in transport infrastructure to support the new vehicle types.  • Shifting from cars to public transit (rail, bus, and BRT).• Shifting freight from trucks to trains (rubber to rail) and ships (rubber to sea).    This case study places greater emphasis on technology change and less on mode shift, in part because it is based on a MACC model that does not fully account for behavior changes such as a shift to mass transit. Thus this model may unfairly compare marginal changes to a carbon-intensive transport mode with the major infrastructure changes needed for an innovative, low-emissions mode. For instance, because recharging networks for electric cars require high fixed investment, the cheapest option would appear to be smaller changes to conventional vehicles. However, climate change uncertainty and inertia argue for early mitigation that requires system-level changes. Despite this drawback of the MACC model, this case study illustrates the economic benefits of such a transition.Case Study BenefitsThe benefits of a shift to cleaner transportation include substantial fuel savings and reduced air-quality-related complications and deaths resulting from respiratory illnesses. Since households and firms would have to buy less fuel, they would have more money to spend on other goods and services; in addition, the reduced demand for oil would lower oil prices, providing a boost to the economy.38 The power sector would, however, need to make investments to meet the increased electricity demand from electric vehicles; the costs of this investment would ultimately be paid by consumers. Other benefits, such as time savings and reduced fatalities from improved public transportation systems, are not quantified here.    Global GDP would be about 0.5 percent and 0.8 percent higher than baseline levels in 2030 for Scenarios 1 and 2 (equivalent to $600 billion and $1 trillion in 2010 dollars, respectively). The impact across countries is, however, heterogeneous. Developed economies would perform best, even in the scenario least favorable to them. For emerging markets, the combination of higher electricity prices and the long-run drag from paying for capital investments (See description of Keynesian effects on Pg. 8), even in the scenario that assumes a significant role for international climate finance, would result in GDP growth being dampened relative to baseline levels in 2030.    By 2030, the mitigation measures undertaken in the five countries and one region are estimated to save more than 21,000 lives globally each year from avoided premature deaths. Within the focus countries and region, the emissions reductions would reduce air-quality-related mortality by about 20,000 lives per year; in monetary terms, the reduced deaths would be equivalent to $87 billion (2010 dollars). India and China account for over 90 percent of the total (see Figure 3.1).    Results of the case study are summarized in Box 3.1.
Summary and ConclusionsAs shown in Figure 3.2, a transformation of the transport sector toward more-efficient vehicles and freight and greater use of advanced biofuels and public transit, would have significant economic and health benefits in the six focus regions. These changes would save about $170 per ton of avoided C02 emissions. At the global level, GDP would be about 0.5-0.8 percent higher than baseline levels in 2030, but the impact across countries would be mixed. Developed economies would perform best, even in the scenario least favorable to them. However, emerging economies, particularly India and China, would reap the greatest benefits in lives saved from reduced air pollution. As noted above, because of limited emissions data, the mortality savings and resulting economic impacts are conservative.Sector Policy Case Study 2: Energy-efficient IndustryDirect and indirect39 C02e emissions from the industrial sector are the single biggest contributor to global emissions. Direct emissions alone account for about 20 percent of global emissions. The cement, chemicals, and iron and steel sectors are the three largest emitters; government policies to reduce their emissions would have a significant impact on the global fight to contain climate change.Case Study InterventionsThis case study considers the impact of a government-led transformation of industry, including a shift to clean fuels and reduced energy consumption. Specific changes include a switch from coal to natural gas, biomass, and electricity; more-efficient motors, kilns, and coke ovens; and carbon capture and storage.Case Study BenefitsThe shift to a more energy-efficient industrial sector would have significant impacts on the economy, health, and agricultural productivity. The TM5-FASST model shows that the fuel switch would reduce emissions-related mortalities by about 52,000 lives per year for the six focus regions; the majority of these are in India (see Figure 3.2). In monetary terms, the mortality savings are equivalent to about $240 billion (2010 dollars). In addition, because of reduced crop damage from ozone emissions, yields for four crops (maize, wheat, rice, and soybeans) would increase by about 1.3 million metric tons in the six regions. The EU and China would reap the most agricultural benefits. The global impact of these mitigation measures (including benefits that accrue outside the six focus regions) would result in a total of about 58,000 lives saved per year in 2030, and in an increase in crop yields of 1.72 million tons per year in 2030.    Based on the GEIM model, global GDP would be about 1-1.2 percent above baseline levels in 2030 in Scenarios 1 and 2 (equivalent to $1.2 trillion and $1.4 trillion respectively), with heterogeneous impacts across countries. Because developed countries have already made substantial improvements to their industrial energy efficiency, the average gains available from lower energy consumption are limited. In Scenario 1 (which assumes that developed countries produce most of the high-tech infrastructure needed to transform the sector), however, developed countries do gain from an increase in exports of capital goods to emerging economies. For the emerging economies, the potential gains from lower energy use are more significant and, as a result, these countries improve their global competitiveness in both scenarios. While the impact on GDP and jobs is positive everywhere, in Scenario 1 developed countries experience slower growth in GDP and employment than in Scenario 2. In both scenarios, emerging economies see significant employment gains. The results of the case study are summarized in Box 3.2.
Summary and Conclusions
A more energy-efficient industrial sector would be a key step in the global effort to contain climate change. As shown in Figure 3.4, such a transition would also have significant global economic, health, and agricultural benefits. Global GDP would be about 1–1.2% above baseline levels in 2030, with uneven impacts across countries. Potential gains from lower energy use are limited for developed countries, because they have already greatly improved their industrial energy efficiency. They could benefit, however, by increasing their exports of high-tech, low-emission capital goods.
Emerging economies could reap significant gains from lower energy consumption. These countries have the most to gain from new capital investments; by reducing their production costs more on average than developed countries, they improve their competitive- ness and gain market share and jobs in both scenarios.
The vast majority of health benefits from reduced air pollution are estimated to occur in emerging economies, particularly in India, Brazil, and China. Crop yields would also rise significantly, especially in the EU, China, and the U.S. As noted above, the health and agriculture benefits are likely understated because of limited emissions data (see Annex C).Sector Policy Case Study 3: Energy-efficient BuildingsAlthough residential and commercial buildings account for a relatively small proportion of global emissions (just under 10 percent), relatively simple and cost-effective improvements in energy efficiency could significantly reduce energy consumption—and therefore energy-related emissions—worldwide.Case Study InterventionsThis case study presents the impacts of government policies to reduce energy use in residential and commercial buildings through more efficient appliances, electronics, and equipment; better insulation, including retrofits and new construction; and improved heating, cooling, and refrigeration systems.Case Study BenefitsReducing the energy used by buildings would have significant impacts on the economy and human health. The TM5-FASST model estimates that the accompanying reductions in emissions of air pollutants would reduce mortality by about 22,000 lives per year in the focus regions. The vast majority of the avoided deaths are in India (as shown in Figure 3.6), primarily due to the large reduction in black carbon emissions when traditional residential cookstoves are replaced with more fuel-efficient ones (see Table C.l in Annex C) and dirty fuels are replaced with liquid petroleum gas and other cleaner fuels (Dinkel et al. 2011). In monetary terms, the lives saved would be equivalent to $102 billion (2010 dollars) for the six regions considered. The global impact of mitigation measures undertaken in the six focus regions is estimated to result in a total of about 24,000 lives saved per year in 2030 from avoided premature mortality. Because of limited data availability, however, this analysis includes only a small subset of pollutants (primarily BC) and an underestimate of emissions mitigated in the buildings sector (Wagner et al. 2013); the estimated health benefits, therefore, are conservative.    From a macroeconomic perspective, the efficiency improvements raise global GDP by 0-0.2 percent in Scenario 1 and 2, respectively (up to $240 billion, in 2010 dollars) from the baseline scenario in 2030. As in other sectors, the key transmission channels are the effects of the changes in capital investment and energy consumption; the impacts are heterogeneous across countries. In Mexico, for example, households can achieve greater energy savings, at lower cost, than households in the other countries.40 Because the cost of household efficiency improvements is more than recouped through lower energy bills, household incomes in Mexico would rise, boosting consumption and GDP. (In contrast, households in Brazil would make the smallest gains in Scenario 1, where efficiency improvements are relatively limited but carry a significant investment cost.)    The heterogeneous impact on GDP is also reflected in employment. Most countries see some growth in jobs; China and India gain the most in absolute numbers, but the increase in Mexico’s GDP means it gains the most jobs relative to its labor force (a1.3 percent rise in employment above the 2030 baseline). The results of the case study are summarized in Box 3.3 below.Summary and ConclusionsImproving the energy efficiency of commercial and residential buildings—including appliances, small equipment, and heating and cooling systems—would support climate change mitigation efforts and benefit human health and the global economy. Global GDP would be about 0-0.2 percent above baseline levels in 2030, but the impact across countries is uneven and largely independent of their income levels. Mexico performs relatively strongly, as its households are able to save significant energy at relatively little cost, which in turn boosts real incomes, consumption, and GDP.    As in other sectors, the vast majority of health benefits from reduced air pollution would occur in emerging economies, particularly India and China. Although not quantified here, impacts on agricultural productivity would also be significant if data were available for a fuller set of emissions (see Annex C).Development Project Case StudiesThe case studies below are based on World Bank-financed, subnational development projects, scaled up to estimate their impacts at the national level. Using the analytical framework described above, these projects are analyzed relative to a “no project” baseline to determine the additional benefits (beyond the net present economic value typically calculated in project financial analysis) that would accrue over the life of each project (generally 20 years).    This presentation differs from the results shown in the sector policy case studies. It is intended to present an aggregated view of each project’s value over the planning horizon in deciding whether to proceed with a project. While these case studies focus on demonstrating a broader range of benefits during the implementation and analysis phases of development initiatives, it is important to consider these issues during the planning stages so that project designers can adjust plans to optimize a comprehensive range of benefits.    All these case studies should be viewed as simulations that, while based on realistic projects and data, require assumptions for scaling that may or may not be feasible to implement. These simulations are meant to demonstrate the potential for additional benefits beyond what is derived from current project-level economic
MULTIPLE BENEFITS ASSESSMENT—CASE STUDIES

analysis.41 (The analytical tools used for these simulations are described in Steps 2 and 3 of the framework (see Chapter 2); the valuation methods are explained at the beginning of this chapter. Finally, see Annex D for more details on these case studies.)Development Project Case Study 1 : Sustainable Transportation in IndiaAffordable, low-emissions transport is crucial for development. People need effective transit options for access to jobs, education, and health services; economic activity requires the transport of goods. Well-designed and -enforced bus rapid transit (BRT) is a relatively inexpensive way to get people out of high-emitting vehicles and to reduce traffic congestion and pollution. In 2009, the World Bank approved a sustainable urban transport project for India that included BRT in three pilot cities. The Pimpri-Chinchwad BRT may serve as a model for replication across India; it was analyzed in depth in this case study to establish realistic benefits that can be expected under real-world conditions.Case Study InterventionsThe results of the Pimpri-Chinchwad BRT analysis and a Ministry of Urban Development (MOUD) study of more than 87 cities across India were used to estimate the length of viable BRT routes that could realistically be developed across India, as well as the per-kilometer costs and benefits of such development. For this case study, the length was estimated at approximately 1,000 km, including more than 422 km that is already included in government plans. This was contrasted against a “no BRT” scenario. The analysis estimates that investment of $3-4 billion would be needed to develop 1,000 km of BRT corridors in about 20 cities across India within 6-12 years.Case Study BenefitsAnalysis using the TEEMP model shows that large reductions in time, emissions, fuel use, and traffic fatalities can be achieved by shifting passenger traffic away from current transportation patterns to a modern BRT system. The emissions reduction benefits were further analyzed using the TM5-FASST tool, which shows that reductions in black carbon and co-pollutant emissions from the expanded BRT would reduce crop losses and deaths from respiratory illnesses. Capital investments, operation and maintenance costs, fuel savings, and productivity benefits were fed into the Oxford Economics GEIM, which shows further benefits: Investment in India’s infrastructure will boost its economy and create jobs, and the switch to mass transit will reduce the overall cost of transport, raising firms’ profit margins and households’ real incomes.    Results are summarized in Figure 3.7; in Box 3.4 they are compared with the net present value of the project as estimated by current project analysis methods. Here the reduced cost of transport per passenger kilometer was scaled up (less project costs). Annual financial flows of all benefits are aggregated through 2033 and discounted at three percent. (See Annex D for a sensitivity analysis to alternative values of the social discount rate.
Summary and ConclusionsA comprehensive value of the project was established by exploring the multiple benefits of expanded BRT systems. As shown above, the benefits include time and fuel savings, reduced environmental impact, and fewer deaths from traffic accidents and air-quality-related respiratory illnesses. There would also be significant macroeconomic benefits. In addition to the $9.7 billion in NPV that might typically be used to justify such a project, this study has identified more than $62 billion in added value, including the social cost of carbon and the welfare benefits of lives saved, crops protected, and GDP growth. In addition, more than 5,000 tons of black carbon emissions would be eliminated, with potentially strong climate benefits. While not all of these benefits can be directly included in the project’s financial analysis, they could be part of the discussion of broader economic benefits that accrue to a country as a result of such a transportation program.Development Project Case Study 2: Integrated Solid Waste Management in BrazilEffective management of municipal solid waste poses “one of the biggest challenges [to] the urban world” (UN-Habitat 2010). In lo win come countries, most cities collect less than half of the waste generated, and only half of the collected waste is processed to minimum acceptable environmental and health standards. Properly managing waste to minimize methane emissions offers a variety of local and global benefits. Locally, improper waste management, especially open dumping and open burning, contaminates water, air, and land; attracts disease vectors; and dogs drains, contributing to flooding. At the global scale, burning waste without proper air pollution controls creates toxic pollutants; improper disposal also pollutes the oceans, threatening ecosystems, fisheries, and tourism. Waste is an emerging contributor to climate change, emitting 5 percent of global GHGs and 12 percent of methane (Bogner et al. 2007). Waste has the potential, however, to be a net sink of GHGs when used as a resource, through recycling and reuse (Bogner etal. 2007).Case Study Interventions
This case study estimates the emissions reductions from integrated solid waste management in Brazil by a simulated scale-up of one project to the national level. The model project selected is an inte- grated solid waste management project with an innovative carbon finance platform. The registered carbon finance methodology inte- grates a seamless payment structure within solid waste management investments, greatly facilitating the sale of credits and the additional benefits that can be captured from those resources. It is a $50 million financial intermediary loan for on-lending to borrowers with solid waste subprojects. The project aims to improve the treatment and disposal of municipal solid waste; its success is measured by the number of open dumps closed and the increased volume of waste disposed in sanitary landfills, composted, or recycled. Brazil was selected for scale-up due to the existing strong regulatory structure and finance instruments available in this sector.
Four different policy scenarios for managing Brazil’s waste were compared with a reference baseline:
• Baseline: The current state of solid waste management in Brazil, with 58 percent of waste going to sanitary landfills, most of which flare the methane produced; the remainder of the waste is going to open dumps, which simply vent the methane produced.

• All landfill scale-up: All generated waste ends up in a sanitary landfill (no more open dumping), and 50 percent of landfill gas is collected and flared.• All landfill with electricity generation: Similar to the previous scenario, but 50 percent of landfill gas is flared and 50 percent is used to generate electricity, displacing natural gas on the electricity grid.• Anaerobic digestion of organic waste with electricity generation: Seventy-five percent of organic waste is sorted and routed to anaerobic digesters to produce electricity, displacing natural gas on the grid; the resulting compost is used as fertilizer (but no market value is assessed for fertilizer substitutions).• Composting for organic waste: Seventy-five percent of organic waste is sorted and composted. Again, this compost is not assumed to displace any fertilizer; this underestimates the environmental benefits.    For all of the Brazilian waste scenarios explored, the most relevant result is the difference between the policy scenario at the baseline and at “full implementation.” The required investment is estimated at $1-2 billion per year through 2030.Case Study BenefitsThe project will result in reduced methane emissions as well as a variety of other benefits, including improved water quality, improved soil quality, improved public health, and decreased mining of natural resources. The methane reductions were estimated using the EASEWASTE solid waste lifecycle assessment model, using data specific to Brazil for generation rates, composition, electricity grid, and landfill behavior. Generic data was used to model the composting facilities and the anaerobic digesters.    Improved organic waste treatment, through anaerobic digestion and composting, with electricity production offers the greatest potential for methane reduction from solid waste for Brazil (on the order of 15-30 million metric tons of C02e per year). These emissions reductions were input into the FASST tool to estimate additional health and crop benefits from reduced ground-level ozone formation. Each year, these could result in 246 to 468 avoided deaths from respiratory illnesses and 53,000-101,000 tons of avoided crop losses (with a value of $9.1-17.4 million globally).    These scenarios also yield significant macroeconomic benefits over the 20-year analysis period, including increased GDP in Brazil of $13.3-$35.2 billion (net present value in 2010 dollars, using a 3 percent discount rate), with a corresponding growth in jobs of 44,000-110,000 depending on the scenario. In addition, 0.5-1.1 percent of national power demand is satisfied as an additional benefit in two of the scenarios. Summaries of the results are shown in Box 3.5 and Figure 3.8.    
The net present value of the project is based on the estimated fees generated if all of Brazil’s solid waste is treated in sanitary landfills, less costs drawn from the recent report What a Waste (Hoornweg and Bhada-Tata 2012)—including purchasing, operations, maintenance, and debt service for each of the options explored. Potential program costs have not been considered here.Summary and ConclusionsThis case study shows that greater emissions reductions can be achieved using an integrated solid waste approach, which considers every step in the waste value chain, than by targeting only one technology (e.g., sanitary landfills). Although methane is emitted only at the point of waste treatment and disposal, efforts to reduce these emissions and manage waste as a resource can occur at every stage: planning, waste generation, collection, treatment, and disposal. Upstream efforts are especially valuable. For example, incentive schemes to reduce waste generation and increase source separation yield two types of SLCP reductions.
First, they directly reduce landfill methane (and other downstream GHG) emissions; second, they displace other sources of SLCP (and GHG) emissions (i.e., fertilizers and natural gas).    Large-scale use of these waste-to-resource technologies requires major investments of $l-$2 billion per year in upstream waste reduction and source separation. Without separation of waste at the household diesel, neither composting nor anaerobic digestion is economically feasible Making these investments, however, would lead to significant economic returns. The NPV of such a project is estimated at approximately $100 billion. In addition, between $22-$52 billion in additional value stems from increased GDP, the social value of carbon (beyond carbon finance), reduced mortality, and improved crop yields. All these benefits should be considered in the economic analysis of such a project.Development Project Case Study 3: Cleaner Cookstoves in Rural ChinaChina has made great strides in expanding energy access and providing cleaner cooking fuels and improved stoves throughout the country However, about half of China’s population still relies on solid fuels (coal and biomass) for cooking and heating, and the International Energy Agency estimates 241 million people in China will continue to do so by 2030 (WorldEnergy Outlook 2013). Household air pollution from solid fuel use is estimated to cause more than one million premature deaths each year in China (Lirn et al. 2012). Switching to modem fuels would be the most effective way to reduce this pollution and health damage; these fuels are more expensive, however, and require more costly stoves and delivery infrastructure As a result, poorer rural households without access to affordable modem fuels such as liquid petroleum gas and natural gas are unlikely to transition on a large scale Effective interventions to scale up the dissemination of clean-burning, fuel- efficient stoves for household cooking and heating can mitigate the health hazards of burning solid fuels (World Bank 2013c).Case Study InterventionsWhile heating systems and combined cooking and heating stoves also represent important sources of indoor and outdoor air pollution, in order to simplify the analysis, the focus here is only on cleaner cookstoves.    This case study, based on a universal access to clean cooking scenario developed under the China Clean Stove Initiative (World Bank 2013 c), assumes® a publicly supported plan to encourage rural households to switch to more fuel-efficient and environmentally friendly cookstoves starting in 2015. For the first five years, the public sector would support a 20 percent subsidy to rural households for the cost of the dean cookstoves in addition to substantial technical assistance funding. This temporary support is assumed to encourage a robust private market that would propel further deployment of cleaner stoves through 2C80, with households bearing the full cost. The 20 percent subsidy and program and technical assistance will cost $400 million over the program timeframe (2015-2020), supplemented by $1.2 billion in private sector investment, which takes into account reduced household spending in other areas in response to increases spending on cookstoves.    This case study assumes that 40 percent of rural poor households relying primarily on solid fuels for cooking will have switched to cleaner stoves by 2020, and all households will have switched by 2030. This is against a backdrop of increasing urbanization and rising household incomes, which have already established a trend toward modern fuels and cleaner stoves.    Based on these assumptions, more than 20 million subsidized stoves (improved biomass and clean-fuel cookstoves and solar cookers) would be deployed between 2015 and 2020, and more than 50 million unsubsidized stoves would be sold between 2020 and 2C60, significantly speeding up the naturally occurring transition to cleaner stoves.Case Study BenefitsDeploying clean cooking solutions in China would reap many benefits, including improved health, energy savings, and private sector development opportunities. As estimated by the FASST tool, emissions reductions by the year 2(B0 of more than 480,000 tons of PM25 s would have very significant public health benefits. These in dude avoiding an estimated 87,900 premature deaths in that year from lung cancer and heart attacks, the majority (more than 85,000) in China. By 2030, $250 billion (85,000 lives times the estimated $3 million VSL) in avoided mortality could be realized in that year. These benefits are underestimated, however, because they only account for improvements in outdoor air quality; greater health benefits are expected due to improved household air quality, but tools to quantify these benefits are not available.®    The large energy savings, especially from reduced coal use, would add more than $10 billion to the Chinese economy over the 20-year analysis period ending in 2033. The combined energy savings from biomass and coal builds by 2(BO to nearly 490 million gigajoules (GJ) annually, or about three percent of residential energy use. The increased consumer spending also yields j ob gains. A summary of the benefits is presented in Box3.6 and Figure 3.9.Summary and ConclusionsA* plan to encourage rural households to switch to more fuel-efficient and environmentally friendly cookstoves, by subsidizing and supporting deployment of more than 20 million cookstoves between 2015 and 2020, would have large health and energy benefits. It is estimated that more than 85,000 premature deaths from outdoor air pollution could be avoided annually in 2030 (more than one million lives over 20 years) in China alone. The net present value of these health benefits is more than $1.5 trillion in 2010 dollars. Recent studies suggest that more than one million premature deaths are attributed to household air pollution each year (Lim et al. 2012); thus the potential health benefits could be higher if household exposure were included. Large energy savings could also reduce energy costs nationwide, resulting in broad economic benefits of more than $10 billion over the analysis period. Finally, more than 20,000 new jobs could be created.Development Project Case Study 4: Biogas Digesters and Photovoltaic Systems in Mexican AgricultureAccording to Mexico’s Fifth National Communication to the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, agriculture continues to be an important source of the country’s emissions (12% of its GHG emissions in 2010 including both methane and nitrous oxide), primarily from land-use changes, tillage, synthetic fertilizers, and anaerobic decomposition of organic materials. To reduce these emissions and improve the agricultural sector’s contribution to the overall economy, the government of Mexico has prioritized improvements in the sector’s energy efficiency, renewable energy, and biomass practices.Case Study InterventionsThis case study builds on the successful Mexico Sustainable Rural Development Project, a $100 million World Bank loan blended with a $10.5 million Global Environment Facility grant, with additional contributions from the Government of Mexico and project beneficiaries. The project supported a number of technologies, including biodigesters at pig and dairy farms. As of May 2013, 303 biodigesters had been installed, half at pig farms and half at dairy farms. These installations are driven by farmer demand, which is expected to grow as biodigester technology becomes more cost-effective and better adapted to different production scales.    While the original project supports a range of energy-efficiency technologies, this case study focuses exclusively on continued deployment of biodigesters at pig and dairy farms, plus motogenerators and photovoltaic systems on dairy farms, where milk-cooling systems favor the added expense of electrical generation add-ons. The case study assumes that public funding is available to continue leveraging private sector investment in these technologies through 2031, when 90 percent of pig and dairy herds (estimated at 15 million head of pig and 3.2 million head of dairy cattle) would have added manure biodigestion capacity, with generators and PV systems included on the dairy farms.Case Study BenefitsThe project benefits include reduced methane emissions, which lower global background ground-level ozone and related health and agricultural damage. By recovering methane from biodigesters and flaring it or using it to generate electricity, C02e emissions are reduced by 9.4 million tons per year in 2030. Estimated annual benefits include 180 avoided premature deaths from air pollution (but relatively few within Mexico) and 39,000 tons of avoided crop losses worth more than $6 million (mostly outside Mexico). Other benefits include new job creation and improved sanitary conditions due to manure treatment.    The net present value of the project is based on the carbon finance value of the reduced methane emissions, equivalent to nine million tons of annual C02e reductions by 2030 (103 MtC02e cumulatively) and worth more than $1 billion over the 20-year program (less costs of about $600 million). Based on the social cost of carbon, however, this project’s emissions reductions are worth $3.2 billion ($2.2 billion higher than the carbon finance value). The results are summarized in Box 3.7 and shown in Figure 3.10.Summary and ConclusionsSustained investment that achieves 90 percent penetration of manure biodigesters across all the pig and dairy farms and 90 percent penetration of photovoltaic systems across all dairy farms in Mexico would derive significant economic, public health, agricultural, and environmental benefits. In addition, policy reforms to allow farmers to sell excess electricity generated to the power company could produce even larger benefits.    While the project economic analysis assumes a carbon finance value of more than $1 billion, these emissions reductions are more completely represented by the social cost of carbon, which values the reductions at $3.2 billion—in other words, an extra $2.2 billion in welfare value above the finance value. Increased productivity from energy savings adds an additional $1.1 billion in economic benefit; global health and agricultural benefits are monetized at about $4.2 billion. This suggests that more than 17 times the stated project value is not recognized through current practices.Lessons and Conclusions from the Case StudiesThis chapter demonstrates the use of an integrated framework to analyze the multiple development benefits of efforts to mitigate climate change and protect air quality. Both regional policy changes and national development projects are analyzed using the framework; the aim is to demonstrate its efficacy as a tool for local and national policymakers, development organizations, philanthropies, analysts, and others.    
Since the policy-based case studies and the project-based case studies cover different regions and use slightly different metrics, direct comparisons and a summation of benefits are not possible. For instance, the policy interventions are presented in terms of their annual impact in 2C8 0; the project interventions are presented as the aggregate impact over a 20-year assumed life of the project. Either way, a snapshot summary of each case study shows that significant benefits can be realized.    The first three case studies demonstrate the effects of key sector policy interventions and determine the benefits® realized in six regions (the U.S., China, the EU, India, Mexico, and Brazil) and the impact on global GDP. A useful way to view these benefits is to compare them against a similar metric, in this case a metric ton of CO.,e abated in 2030 (seeTable3.1). For example, the transport sector would realize a net return on mitigation of $169 per ton of C02e, even without accounting for the health or GDP benefits. In the buildings sector, where the interventions have the highest costs among the three sectors, the health and GDP benefits are substantial enough to cover the costs. The industrial sector is the most promising in terms of benefits compared with abatement costs. Although crop benefits are not included for transportation or buildings, these benefits would be substantial if a wider suite of emissions data were available (see footnote 52 in Annex C).    Translating the aggregated health, agriculture, and energy benefits for all sector policies into monetary values yields the results shown in Table 3.2.    The project-based case studies examine several sub-national development projects, scaled up to the national level. A sampling of the benefits of these projects is shown in Table 3.3. A striking result of this analysis is that these projects have significant additional value well beyond the already significant stated project benefits.    Added value provides a useful rationale for improving economic analysis, but it may not be the most important way to view the multiple benefits derived by the project-based case studies. Table 3.4 provides an alternative view of the same benefits, categorized as global public goods or local socioeconomic benefits. As the table shows, interventions that reduce methane lead to large global public goods with respect to C02e reductions, health, and agriculture, whereas measures that reduce particulate matter and black carbon have larger local health benefits. All lead to positive economic benefits over the 20-year investment period examined in this analysis.    Grouping the multiple benefits this way makes it easier to recognize the contributions countries can make to greening their own growth in addition to benefits that accrue to the rest of the World.    None of the case studies includes the value of reduced climate change impacts, such as damage caused by more-intense storms, higher storm surges and sea levels, and damaged ecosystems.    While these results may indicate significant costs or benefits in one sector or region versus another, they do not show the integrated impact of all the emissions reduction measures available across sectors and the corresponding inter-sectoral interactions. A more integrated analysis would allow a better understanding of how savings in one sector can be reinvested to cover costs in other sectors to yield overall economic growth. Such synergistic benefits could be greater than the sum of the individual benefits.42    In addition, the full benefits of reduced emissions are not captured in this study due to the limited data in the MACC model (see Annex C for a discussion of the significantly underestimated benefits, based on recent research). As a result, the labor and agricultural productivity benefits (from greater longevity, fewer work days lost to illness, and reduced crop damage) were not included in the macroeconomic analyses because of their small size relative to the impact across the overall workforce. A recent analysis by Sanderson et al. (2013) demonstrates that such effects can be large enough to recoup the entire cost of mitigation. These types of integrated scenarios using a systems approach with additional macroeconomic linkages should be investigated in future work.

Conclusions and Next Steps

The growing cost of environmental degradation in many developing countries is impeding progress toward achieving the World Bank's twin goals of reducing poverty and boosting shared prosperity. According to a recent study, 5.7 percent of India’s GDP in 2009 was lost to environmental degradation, with almost 3.3 percent attributed to air pollution emissions (World Bank 2013b). In China, serious air pollution has become a restricting bottleneck for regional socioeconomic development (CAAC 2013). Developing countries like India and China recognize the concurrent need to reduce air pollution, improve access to affordable energy and convenient transportation, address climate change, and grow their economies. China’s “12th Five-Year Plan on Air Pollution Prevention and Control in Key Regions” places economic development at the center of its air quality management plans; India’s 12th Five-Year Plan (Planning Commission, Government of India, 2013) acknowledges a need to establish “green national accounts” to measure the true costs of environmental degradation and to acknowledge the full benefits of reduced emissions.    As international development organizations, philanthropies, and others support developing countries in prioritizing climate project and policy interventions to close the greenhouse gas “emissions gap,” improved analysis is needed to identify ways to leverage synergies among interventions, reduce costs, and maximize local socioeconomic benefits.    This report puts forth a holistic framework to estimate the multiple benefits of reduced emissions of several pollutants. Including the value of these benefits in economic analysis provides a fuller accounting of the true value of policies and programs and makes a stronger case for coordinated climate and development action. Further, it demonstrates the application of the framework using sectoral case studies at the policy and project level and at national
and regional scales. By doing so, the report shows that national and international policymakers, finance organizations, and others can strengthen their estimation of the multiple benefits of such policies and projects. Furthermore, quantifying the benefits can facilitate support from different constituencies, including those interested in public health and food and energy security. Such improved analyses can also advance international discussions on the most effective ways to avoid the risks of a 4°C warmer world.    The framework presented in this report, like most first time efforts, has some limitations: the framework uses a patchwork of tools that were not designed to seamlessly integrate with one another; it does not account for behavioral issues, such as modal choice in public transit; and it does not explicitly account for the costs of the climate change impacts of these emissions. In addition to addressing these limitations, the framework could be strengthened through additional work:• Further benefits assessments based on more comprehensive emissions data.• Macroeconomic analysis to reflect the benefits of green versus non-green investment options.• Better assessment of tradeoffs, such as between higher costs and productivity gains.• Better assessment of risks to avoid locking-in development on the wrong path.• Inclusion of welfare gains and other non-quantifiable benefits (such as equity and inclusion) in macroeconomic analysis.    Making the framework functional at the sub-national project level faces additional challenges. For example, integrating health
and agriculture benefits into the economic analysis of individual projects (rather than using the global macroeconomic model as has been done in this report) may require a more tailored approach. Local benefits—such as time savings, gender equality, and social inclusion—may also need to be incorporated. Because not all these benefits are quantifiable, a hybrid approach may be needed. These challenges can be overcome if sub-national project teams start testing this framework in partnership with local counterparts to refine it.    
Finally, the preparation of this report included consultative workshops in China and India where the demand for such a framework was strongly articulated by local policy makers and other stakeholders. The consultations identified the need for decision makers at the national and sub-national level to be sensitized to the idea of a framework that can help quantify multiple benefits so that they can consider using it as part of their economic rationale for policies and projects.
References
