 Financial Times • p. 6 • 440 words Washington retreat from Paris climate accord confirmed Environmental pact LESLIE HOOK — LONDON KATRINA MANSON — WASHINGTON 

The US has formally withdrawn from the Paris climate agreement, two-and-a-half years after President Donald Trump announced plans to pull out of the ambitious environmental pact. The exit of the second-biggest global carbon dioxide emitter from the 189-nation accord is a milestone in a presidency that has pushed through a weakening of environmental regulations and voiced support for the fossil fuel sector. Mr Trump has described the pact as a deal that "disadvantages the US to the exclusive benefit of other countries". The US, under then president Barack Obama, played a central role in developing the 2015 accord, which aims to limit global warming to well below 2C. The US exit, the culmination of a bureaucratic process that began a year ago, will be completed automatically and is not dependent on the result of Tuesday's presidential election. But if Democratic challenger Joe Biden becomes president, the US could rejoin the Paris accord quickly. He has said he would do so on his first day in office. "If Biden wins, then the fact that the withdrawal became final on November 4 really won't matter," said Todd Stern, who was the top US climate negotiator during the Obama administration. The US is the only country that has formally left the Paris accord, although several other nations, including Brazil, have talked about quitting. Signatories include China, which announced in September that it would try to become carbon neutral by 2060. Japan and South Korea have also announced net zero targets in recent weeks. Mr Biden has promised a $2tn climate stimulus package and said he would introduce a target of net zero emissions for the US by 2050. He will also aim to make electricity generation emission-free by 2035, which would close coal and gas-fired power stations. Mr Trump has focused on loosening environmental regulations, including watering down vehicle emissions standards set by the Obama administration. "If Trump wins, it is likely that not much will change regarding their stance on climate right away," said Sarah Ladislaw, director of the climate change programme at the Center for International and Strategic Studies. "It is quite likely other countries with ambitious emissions reduction targets ... will try to influence US behaviour through cross-border carbon tariffs and a push to influence the global financial system to incorporate climate considerations." Contentious issues for the next round of climate talks in Scotland next year include creating global carbon markets — which a Biden administration would support — and increasing climate donations from rich countries to poor. 'If Biden wins, the fact that the withdrawal became final on November 4 really won't matter'  