 News, Thursday, February 20, 2020 744 mots, p. 8

Rising water sparks climate change fears in the Great Lakes
Michigan Notebook by Patti Waldmeir

Lakefront property owners lose sleep over flood risks. High school students fill sandbags to protect the fragile coastline. America's Great Lakes, the largest body of fresh water on Earth, are at, or near, historically high levels.

That scenario sounds all too familiar to local residents: last month Lake Michigan, the most variable of the Great Lakes, hit its highest levels since records began. But actually, I'm describing 1969, when I was one of the high-schoolers happy to be let off lessons to break my back on lugging sandbags, rather than my brain on trigonometry. There was ample angst then, too, about high water and the disappearing coastline. The difference was, no one blamed it on global warming way back then.

Today, climate change is everyone's go-to explanation. When I walk my dogs on lakeside paths turned to ice rinks by the overflowing water, other dog owners mutter darkly about global warming. When Lake Michigan's waves crash over Chicago's lakefront hiking trails, the radio anchor fingers climate change. When Lake Superior floods my camper van site in the wilds of the state's Upper Peninsula, a fellow camper assures me it's because "Republicans don't believe in global warming".

But is that really what's going on? In this presidential election year, and in the deeply liberal corner of the Midwest where I live, questioning the reasons for Great Lakes flooding can be seen as a political act.

Even the experts admit there are contradictory factors at play: "It's a cycle. The Great Lakes have gone up and down forever and there's every reason to believe they will continue to do so," says Richard Norton, who works on Great Lakes coastal management at the University of Michigan's Taubman College of Architecture and Urban Planning. "The lakes go down just long enough for people to forget that they go up again." While Prof Norton does not question the evidence of global warming, he confesses it is hard to predict its future effect on lake levels: "In terms of overall water levels, who knows what the impact of climate change will be?" he asks.

Some experts predict that warmer temperatures will lead to more precipitation, thus higher lake levels. They note that last month was the hottest January on Earth since records began, according to the US National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration. Others predict rising temperatures will lead to more evaporation and thus lower lake levels. "There is some reason to think that the fluctuations might come faster, and highs will be higher and lows lower, but even that isn't certain," says Prof Norton.

"One thing we know for sure is that the Midwest has seen an increase in precipitation of about 10 per cent over the past five decades," says Donald Wuebbles, an atmospheric sciences professor at the University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign and lead author of a 2019 report into the impact of global warming on the Great Lakes. Prof Wuebbles, a former climate change adviser to Barack Obama, notes that much of that precipitation is coming in ever more violent storms, which have an outsized effect on Great Lakes coastlines.

"Is this going to be more the norm? We don't know yet. It's likely to be cyclic, as it's been in the past, but maybe it will weight to having higher lake levels. We don't have the definitive studies we need to know."

"It sounds dramatic to say it's a 100-year high," says Prof Norton. "But it's been high like that in the past and it will be high like that in future." What is different now from my sandbagging days 50 years ago, he says, is the amount of property that has been built along coastlines since then.

"It's not so much nature that is changing but that we haven't paid attention to nature. There is a lot more property at risk than in the 1970s and 1980s." What we call natural disasters only end up that way because we have "moved too close and not paid enough attention to nature", he adds.

So will my dogs soon be able to run along the beach that has disappeared since the summer? Will Chicago's Lakeshore Drive have to be closed again, as it was when it flooded in 1987? Will I be able to camp on Lake Superior next summer without my camper van floating away to Canada? It could go either way. 