Climate gentrification is a subset of climate migration, in which certain lower-socioeconomic communities are displaced in place of housing for more wealthy communities. Areas affected by this phenomenon are typically coastal cities, islands, and other vulnerable areas that are susceptible to rising sea levels, extreme weather events, and other climate-related disasters.
Gentrification is a process of economic displacement whereby areas of lower socioeconomic status get upscaled and changed by wealthier people moving in, increasing the cost of living, and ultimately displacing lower class residents. As the climate crisis continues to displace communities globally, a new form of gentrification has been established known as climate gentrification. One example of a community affected by climate gentrification took place in coastal communities in Florida. An article about this states, "Historically, wealthier populations have owned highly desirable waterfront properties and lower income populations have lived on the 'less desirable' land inland and at higher elevation from the coast". Waterfront properties are now experiencing an increased risk of flooding due to sea level rise, storm surge, heavier precipitation and stronger hurricane-force winds during landfall."

History
Historically, these vulnerable areas located within close proximity to the seas and beaches excluded marginalized groups and thus are mainly populated by wealthier communities. This process, however, has now been reversed as the fear of climate change has pushed these marginalized communities, displacing them to the areas they have been traditionally excluded from. Primarily, this widespread displacement of lower income groups can be accredited to the lure of higher ground that has become increasingly prioritized by cities, specifically those located on the coasts. The constant threat of the need to evacuate from extreme weather and rising sea levels has pushed the wealthier community's investments into higher ground, simultaneously taking advantage of the cheaper property values.

Causes
There are a series of factors that contribute to climate gentrification in regions across the world. A combination of urbanization and rapid population growth in coastal and wetland areas driven by economic, cultural, and environmental factors increase the number of individuals exposed to increased flooding. There are multiple types of displacement that occur for different reasons. Direct displacement is due to high rent prices that residents can no longer afford. Indirect displacement or exclusionary displacement occurs when the high prices are a barrier to low income to get into the neighborhood. Lastly, cultural displacement occurs when the residents of the neighborhood no longer have an affinity or sense of belonging to the place they once called home.
As high income households move out of coastal areas, the lurking issues of the climate crisis are pushing people inward. This can be seen through natural disaster events throughout history, specifically hurricanes. Climate-related disasters in 2018 alone displaced more than 1.2 million people. Researchers have since concluded that hurricane damage was positively associated with the likelihood of a New Orleans neighbourhood having gentrified 10 years after Katrina.
Ultimately, it has been proven that natural disasters have paved the way for climate gentrifications but other factors also contribute. Projects that promote neighbourhood rejuvenation have adverse effects. The High Line in New York City, the 606 in Chicago, and the Atlanta BeltLine have prompted similar concerns of accelerated gentrification by bringing attention to the neighbourhoods.

Effects
As a result of climate gentrification, low-income and minority communities are bearing a disproportionate social and economic burden, particularly in coastal areas like Florida. Economically, as wealthier home owners move towards higher elevations due to rising sea levels, the cost of living increases and longtime low-income residents are displaced. This is evidenced by the fact that real estate in elevated regions of Miami has appreciated at a higher rate than anywhere else in the country. In addition, climate adoption investments are exacerbating housing crises, as these new reinforced structures built to withstand flooding, erosion, and other natural events are not affordable for current residents. More than 30 million people were globally displaced in 2020, 98% due to weather and climate hazards. The effects of these extreme weather events can result in developers taking advantage of lower property prices and investing in expensive projects that cater to wealthier homeowners. Once homes are destroyed and new, more expensive structures are created, low-income residents searching for new accommodations are forced to leave their communities.
Socially, impacts of this migration can be the loss of community identity and cultural disruption, as these areas are facing large chunks of demographic turnover. Long time residents are suffering from a loss of community, as many have watched friends and family forced out by wealthy strangers, and their culture is ebbing away as the sea level rises. The effects of gentrification can be immediate in under-resourced communities, and the cycle of forcing people out of their homes will continue as climate change, and gentrification, worsen.

Case study: Little Haiti, Miami
One notable case study on climate gentrification occurred in the Miami neighborhood of Little Haiti. As rising sea levels and increasing temperatures made other areas of Miami more vulnerable to flooding and extreme weather events, developers began investing in Little Haiti as a safer alternative. This led to rising property values, increased rents, and the displacement of long time residents who could no longer afford to live in the area. The climate is essentially driving up the process of previously lower income areas that have now become desirable places to live for the middle and upper class. This case study highlights the ways in which climate change can exacerbate existing inequalities and marginalize already vulnerable populations.
According to a study conducted by the University of Miami, property values in Little Haiti increased by 10% between 2011 and 2016. This is significantly higher than the average increase of 6% in other Miami neighborhoods during the same period. Additionally, the study found that rent in Little Haiti increased by 8% between 2012 and 2017, while the median income of residents remained below the poverty line.
Another study conducted by the University of Michigan estimates that by 2100 13 million people in the greater continental United States area will experience six feet of sea level rise. Of those 13 million people 25% are expected to be from the greater Miami area. This increase in sea level is not accounted for in many housing estimates and in inflation of housing.
Overall, Little Haiti is a historically undesirable place to live. In 2015 a report by Harvard graduate design program showed that out of its 30,000 permanent residents 75% are African American. But with sea levels rising and the protection of little Haiti from flooding and sea levels, the area has experienced a 19% increase in home value in 2016.
The displacement of residents in Little Haiti has also had a significant impact on the neighbourhood's demographics. According to the University of Miami study, the percentage of Black residents in Little Haiti decreased from 81% to 75% between 2011 and 2016, while the percentage of White residents increased from 9% to 15%. This shift in demographics is a clear indicator of the effects of climate gentrification on the neighbourhood.

Solutions
Three specific adaptation measures that can be taken to address climate gentrification and its impacts are the development and use of Community Benefit Agreements (CBAs), Community Land Trusts (CLTs), and inclusionary zoning practices (IZ).
Community Benefit Agreements (CBA) are legally binding contracts that outline the community-benefits the developer must implement in exchange for community support of the proposed project. For example, a Community Benefit Agreement could require a certain number of new housing units be reserved for lower income residents. These agreements can also enforce certain tenant and renter protections against things like rent increases or evictions.
Community land trusts (CLTs) assist in preserving affordable housing by removing land from the market. They do so by purchasing or acquiring land through donations and then using that land to either build or preserve existing affordable housing structures. CLTs also often incorporate renewable energy and water efficiency strategies into their housing projects to reduce costs for residents.
Finally, inclusionary zoning (IZ) generates affordable housing by incentivizing developers to designate a percentage of units in a new housing project at a below-market rate. In comparison to CBA's, the majority of these programs are often mandatory and required by law. Cities can also incorporate climate resilience measures in zoning ordinances. For example, inclusionary zoning programs have the power to require structures to be built to higher elevations to account for sea level rise and flood risks. Two examples of zoning ordinances are in Miami, Florida and Norfolk Virginia. In Miami, rental developments in the Omni district are required to set aside a minimum of 7% of the units for affordable housing. Norfolk has adopted a zoning ordinance that requires all new developments to meet a set of climate resilience criteria.
While revising affordable housing policies are critical for addressing the immediate impacts of climate gentrification, there are other, long-term mitigation measures that must be taken to reduce the impacts of climate change. These measures may include the reduction of CO2 emissions, the improvement of energy efficiency, and the promotion of clean energy use. In order to address climate gentrification, a combination of adaptation and mitigation strategies must be applied.

