

Financial Times (web site)
Monday, February 22, 2021 - Z 563 mots

UK companies face greater scrutiny on climate risks at
upcoming AGMs

Attracta Mooney

British companies that fail to thoroughly report the risks they face from global warming will come under
intense scrutiny during the upcoming annual meeting season after an inﬂuential investor lobby group said it
would issue "amber warnings" for climate laggards.

The Investment Association, the UK's trade body for asset managers with £8.5tn under management, said it
will ﬂag for the ﬁrst time when companies in high-risk sectors fail to report under the Task Force on Climate-
related Financial Disclosures, the framework spearheaded by former Bank of England governor Mark Carney.

Companies that are deemed to be falling short will be issued with so-called amber tops by the IA's Ivis proxy
advice service, which is widely used by asset managers ahead of annual meetings. An amber top, which
indicates   a   signiﬁcant   issue   for   investors   to   consider,   could   lead   to   shareholders   voting   against   either
directors or the accounts.

The IA said fund managers needed companies to report on "climate-related risks in a consistent, clear and
comparable manner" to ensure investors can make better informed long-term investment decisions and
understand how prepared businesses are for the transition to a low-carbon economy.

"As stewards of the economy, investment managers have an important role to play in supporting companies
transition   to   a   more   sustainable   future,"   said   Andrew   Ninian,   director   for   stewardship   and   corporate
governance at the IA.

"Having clear and consistent data on the climate-related risks faced by companies is vital to achieve this, and
investors will now be placing additional pressure on those that fail to provide this information."

He added that the UK was at a "critical juncture" as the country looked to rapidly cut its carbon emissions.

Under plans from the UK government, all businesses will have to report under the TCFDs by 2025 while
groups with a premium listing will be required to do so on a comply or explain basis from next year. But the
IA says it wants companies to provide this information for the upcoming annual meeting season.

The investment body also warned that even when companies reported climate risks, many were not doing a
thorough job. According to its analysis the number of FTSE 100 companies saying they are using the TCFDs
more than doubled last year to 77, but only half reported under all four pillars of the framework - governance,
strategy, risk management and metrics, and targets.

Research from the UK's Financial Reporting Council last year found a similar problem, with only a quarter of
the 60 UK-listed companies it sampled making any reference to climate change in their ﬁnancial statements
and their disclosures generally not going beyond existing accounting standards.

The IA's focus on the TCFDs is being echoed by individual asset managers, including BlackRock and Aviva
Investors, which are also piling pressure on companies to report in line with them. Aviva Investors warned last
month   that   it   would   divest   from   companies   that   failed   to   show   they   were   preparing   for   a   low-carbon
economy, including reporting under the framework.

According to the TCFD, 1,500 organisations globally - including more than 1,340 companies with a market
capitalisation of $12.6tn - have said they support the initiative. But it warned last year that asset managers
were not providing enough information about climate risks at the companies they invest in to enable clients
to make informed choices.



 


