

Financial Times (web site)
Friday, March 5, 2021 - Z 1720 mots

Bank of England's climate mandate has global resonance

Gillian Tett, Billy Nauman, Patrick Temple-West and Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson

With the days growing longer, the brutal winter temperatures starting to abate and vaccination rates ticking
upwards, change is in the air here in New York. For the ﬁrst time in a while it is becoming easier to feel more
optimistic about the future.

There is also cause for hope for sustainable investing advocates. After years of sidestepping the issue, the US
Securities   and   Exchange   Commission   is   charging   ahead   with   a   plan   to   put   environmental,   social   and
governance (ESG) disclosures under the microscope. And in the UK, the new Budget laid some important
groundwork to help Boris Johnson turn the City of London into a hub of green ﬁnance. Read on for more.
(Billy Nauman)

Green bond news in Sunak's red box

Boris Johnson has been keen to paint the UK as a sustainable ﬁnance leader as the UK prime minister looks
to set an example before hosting November's COP26 climate summit. He also needs to convince the world
that the City of London can remain a major ﬁnancial hub post-Brexit.

This week's Budget saw the UK double down on that ambition, with two big green announcements in
chancellor Rishi Sunak 's red box.

First, the Bank of England's mandate is being updated to include the ﬁght against climate change, which
means it will start buying green bonds and purging its books of bonds that fund big polluters.

And second, the UK plans to issue £15bn of green bonds this year.

Climate activists were unimpressed, criticising the plans for a lack of speciﬁcity and urgency. Their scepticism
is warranted: full details of the green bond offering are not expected until June, and the Bank plans to
change its approach to corporate bond buying "before its next scheduled round of investments, in the fourth
quarter of the year".

In any case, the UK has been rather slow to join the green bond market, reports the FT's Joshua Oliver .
"Poland issued the ﬁrst such bond in 2016, while France made its debut in 2017." Germany launched€11.5bn
worth of green Bunds last year.

However, it is still worth noting the importance of the UK's plan. The £12bn to be raised through the green
gilt offering may not meet activists' expectations, but it will help fund the 10-point climate plan Johnson set
out last year.

And it is impossible to ignore the symbolic signiﬁcance of the BoE becoming the ﬁrst major central bank to
make climate change an ofﬁcial part of its mission.

This move builds on the climate work done by former BoE governor Mark Carney and could serve as a model
for other central bank members of the Network for Greening the Financial System.

Karen Ward , JPMorgan Asset Management's chief market strategist, told the FT that investors "should not
underestimate" the reform's potential impact on sustainable investing.

"This could tilt the preference of the central bank's asset purchases and involve considerable regulatory
change to encourage private capital to do likewise," she said. (Billy Nauman)

US watchdog seeks greenwashing whistleblowers

The   US   Securities   and   Exchange   Commission   has   created   an   enforcement   unit   to   hunt   for   possible
misconduct in companies' climate risk and ESG disclosures - an unprecedented move that suggests there
might be abuses that have gone unaddressed.



The unit will focus on misstatements or vagueness in companies' climate change risk disclosures under

 existing rules, the agency said on Thursday. The agency will also be investigating investment advisers and
funds'   ESG   strategies,   and   encouraging   tipsters   to   bring   information   about   potential   climate   or   ESG
misconduct to its whistleblower ofﬁce.


ESG became an SEC examination issue for investment advisers for the ﬁrst time last year. But now, with a
dedicated enforcement task force, "it shows the regulator means business", Doug Davison , a partner at
Linklaters, told Moral Money.

Although   a   "message"   is   all   bark   and   no   bite,   companies   must   take   the   SEC's   action   seriously.   Lazy
disclosures can no longer be tolerated. (Remember Billy Nauman 's 2019 article about Vanguard's "green"
funds?).

"It is particularly interesting that the SEC's alert is calling out reviewing proxy voting policies and records as
well here," said George Raine , a partner at Ropes & Gray. "Asset managers with ESG-oriented products will
want to review their advertising and other documentation."

The announcement also brings the US into line with Europe. Esma in February 2020 announced a new
strategy to combat greenwashing. Moral Money will keep hunting for greenwashing and developments from
the SEC's new task force. Watch this space. ( Patrick Temple-West )

FedEx looks to Yale to help deliver net-zero package

As we wrote recently, there are reasons to look warily on many companies' pledges to cut their emissions to
"net zero" by some distant date, and few such announcements stand out from the crowd at this point. But
one of them is FedEx, which this week not only set a 2040 goal for making its operations carbon-neutral but
detailed $2bn of planned investments to hit it.

Most interestingly, $100m of that sum will go to fund a new "centre for natural carbon capture" at Yale
University. It is a revealing reminder that, for many companies, the scientiﬁc advances required to reach their
net-zero aspirations simply haven't been developed yet.

FedEx's 200,000 delivery trucks are not the problem, chief executive Fred Smith tells Moral Money: falling
battery costs and initiatives such as its recent partnership with GM have put it on track to convert that ﬂeet
to electric vehicles by 2040 while yielding a return on its investment.

The problem is that FedEx also operates the world's largest cargo airline, and sustainable aviation fuels still
cost 5-7 times what jet fuel does, making them "absolutely non economic", he said. The airline could have
offset its emissions, but Smith likened the buying of carbon credits to the trade in papal indulgences. "A lot of
these offsets and carbon credits have been one step from being a sham."

So FedEx concluded (despite some NGOs' scepticism about carbon sequestration) that sequestration was its
best hope of cutting its net emissions and Smith, a Yale alumnus, knew the university had a strong record in
environmental areas including carbon pricing.

Ingrid Burke , dean of the Yale School of the Environment, tells Moral Money the funding will accelerate
research into questions including how to make forests grow faster and how to store CO2 in carbonate rocks
or turn it into building materials and fuels.

Yale president Peter Salovey says such corporate funding is essential because federal funds for such "high
risk, high reward" research have become "very, very hard to get". He expects to see more such partnerships in
the coming years.

As for FedEx, Smith points out that it hopes the investment will pay for itself by cutting its fossil-fuel bill
substantially. "This is not from a FedEx standpoint a virtuous signal," he notes. (Andrew Edgecliffe-Johnson
and Gillian Tett)

Antimicrobial resistance emerges as ESG concern

In December, the FT hosted a discussion on antimicrobial resistance, noting that while there have been
advances in combating the problem, urgent action is needed to develop new drugs. It is troubling, if not
surprising, that coronavirus has diverted attention from this crisis.

Big investors started raising concerns late last year and are pressuring companies to make changes.



On Wednesday, Yum! Brands, the parent company of KFC, Taco Bell and other fast-food chains, agreed to

 



publish a report on the systemic effects of antimicrobial resistance (AMR) in its supply chain by the end of
the year. Yum is the ﬁrst company to disclose this information, said the Shareholder Commons, a US non-
proﬁt that ﬁles shareholder resolutions. The organisation withdrew a petition at Yum as a result of the
company's announcement.


The   agreement   requires   that   Yum   disclose   its   ﬁndings   about   how   antibiotic   use   in   animal   husbandry
threatens global health and shareholder interests. The report should also discuss optimal scenarios for the
food   industry   to   eliminate   or   internalise   antimicrobial   costs   and   describe   how   lobbying   and   political
expenditures affect the realisation of those scenarios.

Yum "recognises the need to limit the use of antimicrobials in order to preserve their efﬁcacy", said Rick
Alexander , chief executive of the Shareholder Commons. Now he hopes to convince McDonald's to consider
a similar pledge. ( Patrick Temple-West )

Grit in the oyster

This week, the short sellers at Hindenburg Research took aim at another green company.

The group's report last year on electric truckmaker Nikola led to the departure of its CEO and an inquiry from
the   US   justice   department.   On   Monday   it   levelled   a   series   of   accusations   at   Ormat,   a   NYSE-traded   US
geothermal power company.

Ormat denied the allegations, and pointed out that, as a short seller, Hindenburg stood to proﬁt from a drop
in its share price. But shortly after Hindenburg made its case, Ormat's chief compliance ofﬁcer and a board
member (who were both named in the report) stepped down.

So far, it looks like investors have not quite worked out what to make of Hindenburg's ﬁndings. Ormat's stock
was already headed downward after its latest earnings report and stayed pretty ﬂat the day the report came
out. But regardless of how this story shakes out, it is a good reminder for responsible investors to take a close
look at their holdings and not automatically assume all "green" companies are immune to hostile scrutiny.

Smart reads

"The ESG stock frenzy of today, however egregious, may yet translate into a better tomorrow," writes the FT's
John Thornhill. ESG could well be in bubble territory, he says: "Financial markets have bet on a greener future
and   begun   funding   the   technologies   needed   to   bring   it   to   life.   But,   just   as   in   previous   technological
revolutions, politicians must now play their part in shaping a productive result."

Further reading

The Old Lady turns green (FT Alphaville)

What we learned from ExxonMobil's investor day (FT Energy Source)

Italy raises€8.5bn in Europe's biggest-ever green bond debut (FT)

Google's approach to historically Black schools helps explain why there are few Black engineers in Big Tech
(Washington Post)

Dai-ichi Life targets 30% cut in portfolio CO2 emissions by 2025 (Nikkei)

Everyone Sees ESG Investing Differently, But They All Want to Buy (WSJ)

ESG investments surged in Asia-Paciﬁc in 2020 as sustainable investing takes off, MSCI survey ﬁnds (CNBC)

Biden climate envoy John Kerry talking to banks, asset managers about mobilising capital for clean energy
(CNBC)



 


