 Letters, Monday, November 15, 2021 641 mots, p. 20  COP26 made history but has still fallen short  MONDAY 15 NOVEMBER 2021\More ambitious climate plans are vital at next year's conference  COP26 was always going to struggle to meet the world's expectations. The conference has not shifted the planet decisively on to a path that will save it from the worst ravages of climate change, though decisions before it began had made that an unrealistic hope. This COP has nonetheless left the door open, by an inch, to restraining the overall rise in temperature to 1.5C — provided countries heed a call to come back a year from now with more ambitious carbon reduction plans for the rest of what is a pivotal decade.  The conference president, Alok Sharma, briefly choked up at the close, apologising for a process that allowed India and China to water down a commitment in the final text for governments to phase "down" unabated coal power, rather than phasing it out as an earlier version had proposed.  Yet even the mention of coal by name was a breakthrough for such a conference — as was a commitment to phase out "inefficient fossil fuel" subsidies. So was the meeting's expression of "deep regret" for the failure of rich countries to meet climate financing pledges made to poorer countries more than a decade ago, and a vow to at least double funding to help those nations adapt to a warming climate. These moves are welcome, as is the spate of COP26 side deals aimed at cutting emissions faster.  Yet delegates from the nearly 200 countries have left Glasgow with the same grim mathematical problem they had when they arrived.  All their climate plans and pledges for this decade do not yet add up to enough to meet the goals of the 2015 Paris agreement: to keep global warming "well below" 2C from pre-industrial levels, and preferably the safer limit of 1.5C. Instead, analysts estimate the world is on track for about 2.4C of warming. A best-case estimate of a 1.8C temperature rise is only possible based on the heroic assumption that countries will meet all their 2030 promises, and pledges to cut emissions to net zero by 2050 or soon after.  This outcome was largely inevitable, considering how many countries arrived in Glasgow with weak or substandard plans to cut their emissions. Yet COP26 was not pointless.  The meeting has bolstered the Paris agreement in important ways. First, it has recognised the primacy of its 1.5C goal, and the scientific consensus that reaching it will require global emissions almost to halve by 2030 and reach net zero by around 2050.  The final text requested countries to "revisit and strengthen" their 2030 targets as necessary to be in line with the Paris goal, by the end of next year. Other gains included the unexpected acknowledgment from the US and China that the imperative of tackling climate change trumps the many disagreements dividing the two superpowers. The pair must now put their words into deeds. If emissions in China, which account for around 27 per cent of global greenhouse gas pollution, do not peak before 2030, that raises questions about whether the 1.5C goal can be reached.  In another encouraging step, western nations at COP26 announced an $8.5bn deal to help South Africa close its coal plants faster and move to a clean energy economy over the next five years. This concrete example of how a "just transition" from reliance on fossil fuels might be achieved should be replicated in other emerging economies.  Deals to cut methane, halt deforestation and phase out sales of new petrol and diesel cars have laid the groundwork for future COPs to spur more direct action. This, too, is good news, but not nearly enough. Egypt will host COP27 next year. Governments must ensure it does better than COP26. 