

Financial Times
Features, Saturday, February 27, 2021 2079 mots, p. 8

Life and Arts

Climate warriors
Essay | Global warming has made environmentalists of us all. Yet debate still rages over what
is the best solution. Pilita Clark looks at three differing views on how we could be tackling
climate change

Pilita Clark looks

A professor all write a book about climate change. That may sound like the start of a joke but it is not,
especially for philanthropist Bill Gates and author Jonathan Franzen . Their books have come out just as
Michael E Mann, one of the world's best known climate scientists, has published a book accusing each of
abetting new forces of inactivism slowing efforts to tackle climate change.

It is hard to think of another time the publishing world has delivered such an engaging spectacle. As raging
wildﬁres and deadly ﬂoods drive a new sense of urgency, the debate about how to curb global warming has
spread far beyond the scientists, economists and activists who once dominated the ﬁeld. We are all, as it
were, environmentalists now.

Yet the scale of the climate problem makes it hard to know what constitutes a meaningful response. Is it
enough to give up meat and ﬂying? Do we need a slew of technological breakthroughs? Or is disaster now
inevitable and any sort of action too late?

These three books address all these questions, but none so comprehensively as Mann. The Pennsylvania
State University professor has had an unusually vivid view of the battle to cut the world's dependence on
fossil fuels.

He was still in his early thirties in 1998 when he and two colleagues published what has been called the most
controversial chart in science: the hockey stick. At a time of widespread denial about climate change, their
simple graph showed global temperatures had varied little for centuries, but shot up after fossil fuel burning
took off after the industrial revolution. In other words, the world was warming at a rate unseen in modern
history and humans were causing it.

Mann faced a blistering effort to discredit his work — and even death threats. In the US, Republicans in
Congress, many of them recipients of fossil fuel industry donations, accused him of inaccuracy, fraud and
worse, as he recounted in his 2012 book, The Hockey Stick and the Climate Wars.

Nearly a decade later, the science behind the hockey stick remains robust. Yet Mann makes a convincing
case that the ﬁght against climate action continues — under different terms of engagement. "Outright
denial of the physical evidence of climate change simply isn't credible any more," he writes in The New
Climate War. The war on the science has ended, he says. But in its place has come a war on climate action, or
"a softer form of denialism" in which "inactivists" deploy a mix of deception, deﬂection and distraction to
delay cuts in emissions.

Many readers will be surprised to learn that one of Mann's chief complaints concerns ﬂight-shaming, vegan
diets and other types of individual behaviour widely thought to be central to tackling climate change.
Personal actions can help, and often set a sensible example. But, as Mann writes, they cannot rival broad,
systemic measures such as carbon pricing or ending fossil fuel subsidies. For all the scrutiny of ﬂying, it
currently accounts for about 3 per cent of global carbon emissions.

Worse, some research suggests a focus on personal behaviour creates an illusion of progress that can erode
support for more effective collective policies. One study found the more people switched off lights and
scrimped on household energy use, the less likely they were to support a carbon tax.

Dwelling on individual behaviour is also a "particularly devious" deﬂection strategy, Mann argues, because it
breeds   divisive   ﬁnger-pointing   among   campaigners   and   attempts   to   render   leaders   as   elite   hypocrites.
Celebrity climate activist Leonardo DiCaprio, for instance, is often lambasted for ﬂying in a private jet. After Al

 





Gore released his 2006 documentary, An Inconvenient Truth, claims emerged that his home used 20 times
more energy than the average American house.


Mann shows attention on personal action did not occur in a vacuum. Oil companies were early promoters of
the personal carbon footprint calculator and there is a well-thumbed playbook for industries seeking to
divert attention from their own activities to individuals using their products. The US gun lobby claims "guns
don't kill people, people kill people" to fend off tougher laws; beverage groups back campaigns against
roadside litter created by their own bottles and cans.

Some of Mann's other examples of soft denialism are even more insidious because they are promoted by
green activists themselves. Exhibit one: what he calls climate "doomists" who promote the idea that all hope
is lost and action is fruitless, which is where Jonathan Franzen comes in.

The best-selling US novelist is no climate denier. But in 2019 he caused an outcry with an elegantly written
New Yorker magazine article titled "What if We Stopped Pretending?" which argued climate disaster was all
but certain and it made sense to focus on how to use ﬁnite resources to deal with it. His new 70-page
booklet bears the same title and includes the article, along with an interview Franzen gave a German
journalist to expand on his views. "All-out war on climate change made sense when only as long as it was
winnable," says Franzen. Human nature has made meaningful climate action almost impossible and "a false
hope of salvation can be actively harmful," he argues. Preparing for ﬂoods, ﬁres and refugees might be more
pertinent. The essay reads at times like an elegiac counsel of despair. For the pugnacious Mann it is far worse.
He devotes nearly four pages to what he calls "one of the most breathtakingly doomist diatribes" ever
written. The fundamental problem with the article, Mann rails, is that it attempts "to build a case for doom on
a ﬂimsy foundation of distorted science".

Mann argues that it is still possible to avert 2C of warming and that every bit of carbon that is not burnt
prevents additional damage. "There is both urgency and agency," he says. Social and political changes also
give him cause for cautious optimism. Apart from the fact that outright denialism is fading and that climate
action advocates such as Joe Biden are being elected, he is buoyed by the youth climate movement and the
rise of investors rethinking the risks of fossil fuel investments.

In addition, he thinks the Covid crisis has reawakened appreciation of science, while pandemic recovery
plans have opened opportunities for green investments. "We appear to be nearing the much-anticipated
tipping point on climate action," he writes.

Yet the urgency of the problem remains, which is what leads Mann to cite Bill Gates on several charges of
climate inactivism.

The Microsoft co-founder is not an obvious target. Unlike other billionaires bent on reaching Mars or the
Moon, Gates has spent vast sums to improve the lives of the poorest on this planet. He warned of the need to
prepare for a global pandemic years before the current crisis and is now leading vaccine efforts to defeat
Covid-19. He is also a lavish backer of technologies to avert what he says is the very real threat of global
warming, as he details in his book, How to Avoid a Climate Disaster .

Yet Gates has long irked many climate campaigners. He has raised doubts about using green energy in
developing countries (a form of inactivism for Mann) and scorned the idea of fossil fuel divestment, telling
the FT in 2019 it had "zero" impact on emissions.

In his new book, Gates reveals he actually divested his direct holdings in oil and gas companies in 2019. He
still   supports   what   Mann   calls   "non-solution   solutions"   offering   the   illusion   of   climate action,   such   as
geoengineering schemes to offset warming carbon emissions. Gates has long been among the largest
funders of research into such efforts, which can range from directly capturing carbon dioxide from the air to
shooting sulphate particles into the atmosphere to mimic the cooling effects of volcanic eruptions.

For Mann, these schemes come under the heading of "dangerous techno-ﬁxes" that appeal to free-market
conservatives — by suggesting government regulation is unnecessary — but entail hugely risky "tinkering"
with complex Earth systems we do not fully understand.

Gates   acknowledges   such   concerns,   admitting   that   unproven   geoengineer-   ing   concepts   raise   "thorny
ethical issues". He adds that his funding for such efforts is "tiny" compared to his other climate ﬁnancing. But
he still thinks the approach is worth investigating "while we still have the luxury of study and debate".



The idea that there is time to develop meaningful climate solutions underpins a central theme of the book,
namely   that   existing   green   technologies   are   not   enough   and   must   be   augmented   by   big   innovation

 



breakthroughs. "We have some of what we need, but far from all of it," he says.


This puts Gates on one side of a debate between those who think the climate problem will be solved by
technology, versus those who believe the technology needed is here and what is required is more political
will and policies to deploy it.

Mann belongs to the latter camp. "Sorry Bill Gates, but we don't need a miracle," he writes, pointing to
academics who showed years ago that existing renewable energy and storage technologies could meet up
to 80 per cent of global energy demand by 2030, and 100 per cent by 2050.

The framework Gates uses to support his view is based on his idea of the "green premium", or the extra cost
of   zero-carbon   technologies   compared   with   fossil   fuel   alternatives.   The   average   cost   of   a   gallon   of
conventional jet fuel, for instance, is $2.22, while jet biofuels cost about $5.35, so the green premium adds up
to $3.13.

He argues that clean technologies should only be deployed if they have a low or zero green premium, which
by his analysis excludes all but a handful of options, such as home air heat pumps in some cities which in
certain cases can actually be cheaper than fossil fuel alternatives. That is, he admits, partly because fossil fuel
prices do not reﬂect the damage they inﬂict, and meaningful carbon pricing will be "crucial" to eliminating
green premiums.

This analysis is useful. So too is his accessible description of what needs to be done to tackle climate change:
bring the 51bn tons of greenhouse gases typically emitted globally each year down to zero.

Some readers may ﬁnd his folksy tone, and occasional fart joke, more agreeable than Mann's punchier work.
Others may wonder how Gates managed to write an entire book on climate action that scarcely mentions
the powerful political forces bent on thwarting it.

Either way, his approach leads him down some curious paths, especially when it comes to the state of
existing renewables. Readers in the UK, who have been getting more than 10 per cent of their electricity
from offshore wind farms this year, will be surprised to see Gates describe offshore wind as a green idea
"currently in the proof phase" of market development, along with lowcarbon cement.

Likewise, Gates is oddly dismissive of the idea that emissions should fall fast this decade, despite UN science
reports showing global emissions should halve by 2030, and reach net zero by 2050, to avoid 1.5C of warming.
"Making reductions by 2030 the wrong way might actually prevent us from ever getting to zero," he claims.
We might, for instance, replace coal power plants with gas-ﬁred ones that have carbon capture equipment
but   still   emit   greenhouse   gases.   Theoretically,   that   is   a   risk.   But   so   is   waiting   years   for   innovation
breakthroughs that do not arrive.

Ultimately, Gates and Mann probably agree more than they disagree. Each wants action to curb warming
emissions that pose a dire threat to the climate and, considering the torrid state of climate disputes in very
recent history, that is a welcome relief.

Pilita Clark is an FT business columnist

The New Climate War: The Fight to Take Back Our Planet by Michael E Mann Scribe £16.99, 368 pages

How To Avoid A Climate Disaster: The Solutions We Have and the Breakthroughs We Need by Bill Gates Allen
Lane £20/Knopf $26.95 272 pages

What If We Stopped Pretending? by Jonathan Franzen Fourth Estate £7.99, 70 pages

The science behind the hockey stick remains robust yet Mann makes a convincing case that the ﬁght against
climate-action continues



 


