

The New York Times (web site)
Tuesday, February 16, 2021 -  1436 mots

A Glimpse of America’s Future: Climate Change Means
Trouble for Power Grids

By Brad Plumer

Systems are designed to handle spikes in demand, but the wild and unpredictable weather linked to global
warming will very likely push grids beyond their limits.

Huge winter storms plunged large parts of the central and southern United States into an energy crisis this
week, with frigid blasts of Arctic weather crippling electric grids and leaving millions of Americans without
power amid dangerously cold temperatures.

The grid failures were most severe in Texas, where more than four million people woke up Tuesday morning
to rolling blackouts. Separate regional grids in the Southwest and Midwest also faced serious strain. As of
Tuesday afternoon, at least 23 people nationwide had died in the storm or its aftermath.

Analysts have begun to identify key factors behind the grid failures in Texas. Record-breaking cold weather
spurred residents to crank up their electric heaters and pushed power demand beyond the worst-case
scenarios that grid operators had planned for. At the same time, a large fraction of the state’s gas-ﬁred
power plants were knocked ofﬂine amid icy conditions, with some plants suffering fuel shortages as natural
gas demand spiked. Many of Texas’ wind turbines also froze and stopped working.

The crisis sounded an alarm for power systems throughout the country. Electric grids can be engineered to
handle a wide range of severe conditions — as long as grid operators can reliably predict the dangers ahead.
But as climate change accelerates, many electric grids will face extreme weather events that go far beyond
the historical conditions those systems were designed for, putting them at risk of catastrophic failure.

While scientists are still analyzing what role human-caused climate change may have played in this week’s
winter   storms,   it   is   clear   that   global warming   poses   a   barrage   of   additional   threats   to   power   systems
nationwide, including ﬁercer heat waves and water shortages.

Measures that could help make electric grids more robust — such as fortifying power plants against extreme
weather, or installing more backup power sources — could prove expensive. But as Texas shows, blackouts
can be extremely costly, too. And, experts said, unless grid planners start planning for increasingly wild and
unpredictable climate conditions, grid failures will happen again and again.

“It’s essentially a question of how much insurance you want to buy,” said Jesse Jenkins, an energy systems
engineer at Princeton University. “What makes this problem even harder is that we’re now in a world where,
especially with climate change, the past is no longer a good guide to the future. We have to get much better
at preparing for the unexpected.”

A System Pushed to the Limit

Texas’ main electric grid, which largely operates independently from the rest of the country, has been built
with the state’s most common weather extremes in mind: soaring summer temperatures that cause millions
of Texans to turn up their air-conditioners all at once.

While freezing weather is rarer, grid operators in Texas have also long known that electricity demand can
spike in the winter, particularly after damaging cold snaps in 2011 and 2018. But this week’s winter storms,
which buried the state in snow and ice, and led to record-cold temperatures, surpassed all expectations —
and pushed the grid to its breaking point.

Texas’ grid operators had anticipated that, in the worst case, the state would use 67 gigawatts of electricity
during the winter peak. But by Sunday evening, power demand had surged past that level. As temperatures
dropped, many homes were relying on older, inefﬁcient electric heaters that consume more power.



The problems compounded from there, with frigid weather on Monday disabling power plants with capacity

 



totaling more than 30 gigawatts. The vast majority of those failures occurred at thermal power plants, like
natural gas generators, as plummeting temperatures paralyzed plant equipment and soaring demand for
natural gas left some plants struggling to obtain sufﬁcient fuel. A number of the state’s power plants were
also ofﬂine for scheduled maintenance in preparation for the summer peak.


The state’s ﬂeet of wind farms also lost up to 4.5 gigawatts of capacity at times, as many turbines stopped
working in cold and icy conditions, though this was a smaller part of the problem.

In essence, experts said, an electric grid optimized to deliver huge quantities of power on the hottest days of
the year was caught unprepared when temperatures plummeted.

While analysts are still working to untangle all of the reasons behind Texas’ grid failures, some have also
wondered whether the unique way the state manages its largely deregulated electricity system may have
played a role. In the mid-1990s, for instance, Texas decided against paying energy producers to hold a ﬁxed
number of backup power plants in reserve, instead letting market forces dictate what happens on the grid.

On Tuesday, Gov. Greg Abbott called for an emergency reform of the Electric Reliability Council of Texas, the
nonproﬁt   corporation   that   oversees   the   ﬂow   of   power   in   the   state,   saying   its   performance   had   been
“anything but reliable” over the previous 48 hours.

‘A Difﬁcult Balancing Act’

In theory, experts said, there are technical solutions that can avert such problems.

Wind turbines can be equipped with heaters and other devices so that they can operate in icy conditions —
as is often done in the upper Midwest, where cold weather is more common. Gas plants can be built to store
oil on-site and switch over to burning the fuel if needed, as is often done in the Northeast, where natural gas
shortages are common. Grid regulators can design markets that pay extra to keep a larger ﬂeet of backup
power plants in reserve in case of emergencies, as is done in the Mid-Atlantic.

But these solutions all cost money, and grid operators are often wary of forcing consumers to pay extra for
safeguards.

“Building in resilience often comes at a cost, and there’s a risk of both underpaying but also of overpaying,”
said Daniel Cohan, an associate professor of civil and environmental engineering at Rice University. “It’s a
difﬁcult balancing act.”

In the months ahead, as Texas grid operators and policymakers investigate this week’s blackouts, they will
likely explore how the grid might be bolstered to handle extremely cold weather. Some possible ideas
include: Building more connections between Texas and other states to balance electricity supplies, a move
the   state   has   long   resisted;   encouraging   homeowners   to   install   battery   backup   systems;   or   keeping
additional power plants in reserve.

The search for answers will be complicated by climate change. Over all, the state is getting warmer as global
temperatures rise, and cold-weather extremes are, on average, becoming less common over time.

But   some   climate   scientists   have   also   suggested   that   global warming   could,   paradoxically,   bring   more
unusually ﬁerce winter storms. Some research indicates that Arctic warming is weakening the jet stream, the
high-level air current that circles the northern latitudes and usually holds back the frigid polar vortex. This
can allow cold air to periodically escape to the South, resulting in episodes of bitter cold in places that rarely
get nipped by frost.

But this remains an active area of debate among climate scientists, with some experts less certain that polar
vortex disruptions are becoming more frequent, making it even trickier for electricity planners to anticipate
the dangers ahead.

All   over   the   country,   utilities   and   grid   operators   are   confronting   similar   questions,   as   climate change
threatens to intensify heat waves, ﬂoods, water shortages and other calamities, all of which could create
novel risks for the nation’s electricity systems. Adapting to those risks could carry a hefty price tag: One
recent study found that the Southeast alone may need 35 percent more electric capacity by 2050 simply to
deal with the known hazards of climate change.

And  the   task   of  building   resilience   is  becoming   increasingly  urgent.   Many   policymakers  are   promoting
electric cars and electric heating as a way of curbing greenhouse gas emissions. But as more of the nation’s
economy depends on reliable ﬂows of electricity, the cost of blackouts will become ever more dire.

 





“This is going to be a signiﬁcant challenge,” said Emily Grubert, an infrastructure expert at Georgia Tech. “We
need to decarbonize our power systems so that climate change doesn’t keep getting worse, but we also
need to adapt to changing conditions at the same time. And the latter alone is going to be very costly. We
can already see that the systems we have today aren’t handling this very well.”


John Schwartz, Dave Montgomery and Ivan Penn contributed reporting.

 


