

The New York Times (web site)
Thursday, February 18, 2021 -  500 mots

A Times climate reporter answers questions about this
week’s weather.

In today’s edition of the Morning newsletter, David Leonhardt writes:

To make sense of this week’s cold spell and storms, I spoke with John Schwartz, a Times reporter who focuses
on the climate. Our conversation follows.

Question: Let’s start with a simple question on some people’s minds — How do you think about record-low
temperatures hammering parts of the U.S. at the same time that we’re experiencing global warming?

John Schwartz: It does sound counterintuitive! Those who deny climate science love to declare that there’s
no such thing as climate change whenever the weather turns cold. But weather remains variable, and cold
weather in winter still happens, even if the overall warming trend means that winters are getting milder.

Q: And is there any relationship between this week’s storms and climate change? I noticed that the climate
scientist Katharine Hayhoe uses the phrase “global weirding.”

John: There’s interesting science that suggests the effects of a warming world have something to do with
these sudden bursts of Arctic cold, as well. The cold air at the top of the world, the polar vortex, is usually held
in place by the circulating jet stream. The Northern Hemisphere’s warming appears to be weakening the jet
stream, and when sudden blasts of heat in the stratosphere punch into the vortex, that Arctic air can spill
down into the middle latitudes.

Q: Are there any other changing patterns of winter weather that may be connected to climate change?

John: A warming atmosphere can hold more moisture, so when you do get storms you can expect to see
heavier rain and snow. There’s also fascinating research that links a warming Arctic to increased frequency of
the broad range of extreme winter weather in parts of the United States. It’s known as “warm-Arctic/cold-
continents pattern,” a phenomenon that’s still being studied.

Q: What are the recent weather trends — during winter or not — where the evidence most strongly suggests
climate change is playing a role?

John: In the United States, we’re seeing longer wildﬁre seasons because of hotter, drier conditions, and our
hurricanes are becoming more destructive in several ways, including ﬂooding and storm surge. It’s even
worsening the misery of pollen season. We’ve always had ﬂoods, ﬁres and storms, but climate change adds
oomph to many weather events.

I realize I’m repeating myself here, but scientists are still hashing out all of this. While the science underlying
the links between human emissions and climate change is rock solid, some of the particulars, such as
whether climate change will cause us to see more frequent blasts from the polar vortex, are still being
debated. And that’s as it should be.

For more: Bill Gates tells The Times that “‘Weather for Dummies’ is probably the best book written for a
general audience” about the relationship between climate change and the weather.



 





 


