 Business, Wednesday, December 1, 2021 1043 mots, p. 4  Business  Crippled World Trade Organisation no longer champions free markets  Instead of fair trade, the agenda is dominated by vaccine equality and climate change concerns Jeremy Warner  Yesterday should have marked the start of the 12th ministerial meeting of the World Trade Organisation, an event that has been repeatedly postponed by the pandemic. The latest plans were, unfortunately, no exception. Yet again, the meeting has been cancelled, this time because of the advent of the omicron variant.  The conference, it would seem, is fated, as indeed may be the World Trade Organisation itself, where the cancellation can be seen as a metaphor for much wider deficiencies.  The purpose of the WTO is to uphold the principles of free trade, and to act as their policeman on the world stage. On both counts, the WTO is failing as rarely before.  It matters little that its ministerial meeting has again been postponed; it was in any case very unlikely to achieve anything of significance. The omicron variant has saved its officials from the embarrassment of having to admit as much.  The progressive destruction of the free-trade agenda together with the steady ebbing away of the WTO's authority is one of the great sadnesses of our time.  Applied fairly, free trade is an unarguable public and economic good; it is both the best guarantee there is of economic progress, and of peace between nations. Those that trade freely with each other are also less likely to fight each other.  Hopes were high for the WTO when it first came into being 26 years ago as the successor body for the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade. The aim was to reduce or eliminate tariffs, quotas and other restrictions on global trade in goods, and eventually services too. With the accession of China to the WTO in 2001, about 98pc of global trade would be covered by its rules and judgments. As multilateral organisations went, this one looked like a winner.  But it's not worked out that way. Far from cementing a new global order, China's membership has ended up breaking it asunder. Trade liberalisation has stalled, and the WTO has progressively lost legitimacy. Up went the cry: free trade yes, but fair trade too.  What China was doing seemed far from fair, with widespread abuse of intellectual property rights and often massive state subsidy to key industries. A fierce political backlash soon ensued.  Most analysis finds that technology has been far more important in undermining traditional Western jobs and livelihoods than Chinese competition, but it is a "lying, cheating and stealing" China that tends to get much of the blame for the social dislocation globalised trade has given rise to. The WTO became widely viewed as China's poodle.  In bulldozing its way into Western markets, China has run rings round the rules-based system the WTO is meant to uphold, taking advantage of its "developing world" status to gain favourable judgments and dispensations. This should have ended a long time ago, but China still tends to get treated with kid gloves.  With the election of Donald Trump as US president, America signalled that it had had enough. In this regard, not much has changed with the transition to Joe Biden. In some respects, he's more protectionist than Trump; he speaks the language of international engagement, while practicing something quite different.  Just recently, Biden unilaterally imposed swingeing tariffs on imports of Canadian lumber, apparently oblivious to the fact that by doing so he is further adding to already intense inflationary pressures in the US construction sector. American sawmills love him for it, consumers not so much.  The supposed adjudicator, the WTO, has become little more than an irrelevance in the game of superpower muscle flexing being played out between the US and China. With key appointments still blocked, its appeals procedures are in a state of paralysis. As for the organisation's still relatively new director-general, Ngozi Okonjo- Iweala, she has utterly failed to turn the tables.  So stitched up by Third Worlders has the appointments process become that no Western candidate for the job ever stood a chance. They could, on the other hand, scarcely have failed to do a better job.  Instead of tackling the burning issues of free and fair trade, Okonjo- Iweala finds herself pursuing largely unrelated, and intractable, grandstanding causes such as "vaccine equality" and fishing rights, not to mention our old friend climate change.  All these things do admittedly have some bearing on free and fair trade, but are also distractions from the WTO's core purpose - to stand firm against the incoming tide of protectionism and unfair practice.  I'd like to think otherwise, but I fear that Trump was right about the WTO. Multilateralism of the type that is meant to be championed by the WTO is not up to the task of advancing free trade; there are simply too many parties involved to achieve globally gainful outcomes.  The basic principle - that signatories are not allowed to pick and choose between those they apply restrictions to, but must treat everyone the same - is fine as far as it goes, but it is very hard to maintain in practice. The future lies instead in bilateral free trade agreements between likeminded nations of preferably similar levels of economic development. These are much easier both to police and to deepen into a more integrated economic relationship.  Making the argument for free trade becomes harder when dealing with countries with lower labour and environmental standards. The perceived need for greater resilience in supply chains, and the political pressures for decoupling from the Chinese economy, make the case for global free trade harder still. Worse, political leaders increasingly use access to their domestic markets as a tool for extracting non-economic concessions. Free trade as an economically advantageous end in itself is a dying faith.  Yet we shouldn't altogether despair. We can go a long way with bilateral arrangements, and with big free trade blocs, such as the Comprehensive and Progressive Agreement for Trans-  Pacific Partnership, originally set up as a bulwark against Chinese domination of the Pacific.  The WTO may have lost its way, but free trade is not yet entirely dead.  'Far from cementing a new global order, China's membership has ended up breaking the WTO asunder' 