

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Thursday, March 4, 2021 483 mots, p. 9

Green savings bond allows investors to support climate
projects

By Rachel Millard

SAVERS will be able to invest in efforts to tackle climate change under a new national savings bond to raise
money for green projects.

The product will be launched through National Savings and Investments (NS&I) this year as the Government
tries to get the country behind its efforts to cut carbon emissions to net zero by 2050. Hitting the target will
require up to £50billion in investment per year, according to estimates from the climate change committee,
which   advises   the   Government,   with   major   overhauls   and   changes   in   consumer   behaviour   required   in
sectors such as heating, power and transport.

Details have yet to be announced, but the Treasury said the new savings product would be closely linked to
the framework of a new sovereign green bond, also conﬁrmed in yesterday's Budget, which should issue at
least £15billion this year.

The NS&I product will "give all UK savers the opportunity to take part in the collective effort to tackle climate
change, beneﬁting from the innovative reporting standards planned for the green gilt programme", the
Treasury said. Green projects that could beneﬁt include those which would otherwise struggle to raise
money as they are at an early stage, such as carbon capture and storage schemes.

Returns are expected to be "competitive" but details have yet to be announced. Gareth Mee, UK ﬁnancial
services partner at EY, said green bonds were "interesting and innovative" but must be managed carefully.

He said: "The accounting and monitoring of both these initiatives are complex and will require best-in-class
accounting   and   reporting   frameworks   to   ensure   that   green   funds   are   used   appropriately   and   in   a
transparent manner. Overall, the beneﬁts to the taxpayer and to individual investors have the potential to be
far-reaching."

The bonds are on top of a new UK

Infrastructure Bank, based in Leeds, to leverage billions into efforts to cut carbon emissions and develop
regional economies.

However, many in the energy sector were underwhelmed by the measures in the Budget, given the huge
investment needed to hit the legally binding net-zero target.

Emma Pinchbeck, chief executive of Energy UK, the trade body, welcomed the new bank as well as plans to
upgrade ports to help develop offshore wind turbines. But she added: "Meeting the most ambitious climate
change targets of any major economy will require more ambition than was in today's Budget. We need a
concerted, cross-government approach.

"The energy sector is ready to continue reducing emissions, supporting jobs all around the country and
driving   economic   growth.   The   question   is   how   the   Government   plans   to   turn   their   ambition,   and   our
willingness to invest, into a plan of action."

Alison Murrin, from the law ﬁrm Ashurst, said: "It does feel that the measures announced today only scratch
the surface."

'Overall, the beneﬁts to the taxpayer and to individual investors have the potential to be far-reaching'

