 WORLD NEWS, Saturday, February 20, 2010 431 mots, p. 5

Departing UN climate change chief pessimistic over Cancún deal prospects
By Fiona Harvey in London

De Boer dashes hopes for meeting

Hopes that the world's biggest polluters will strike a deal to cut greenhouse gas emissions this year have been dashed by the outgoing United Nations official in charge of the talks.

Yvo de Boer, whose unexpected resignation as the UN's climate change chief this week dismayed policymakers and campaigners, said there was a "big question mark" over whether a meeting of the world's biggest economies in December would produce a treaty to tackle global warming.

Governments were hoping to adapt a limited accord signed two months ago at Copenhagen, which requires big cuts in emissions by 2020, into a fully fledged treaty at the talks in Mexico.

But Mr de Boer, who will leave in July, told the Financial Times yesterday: "I think you could get a decision at Cancún, and what is agreed there [could be] turned into a treaty, but getting the big agreements on the content and the form at the same time, and finalising that in two weeks - that is a very heavy lift."

His comments are a blow to hopes for a more substantial accord and provide further ammunition to those calling for the urgent reform or abandonment of the UN decision-making process. "This resignation is simply dispiriting," said Paul Bledsoe, policy director at the US National Commission on Energy Policy and a former White House adviser. "If someone as politically adept, dedicated and charismatic as Yvo de Boer can't bring the [UN] process to heel, then the process is broken and has to be reformed."

Mr de Boer gave a crumb of comfort to supporters of a treaty, saying businesses were taking up the challenge of climate change in spite of the failure of governments to draw up a legal framework on -emissions.

In thinly veiled criticism of governments' reluctance to involve business, he said: "The [negotiating] text is deafeningly silent on the role of the private sector. Regulators have the opportunity to design [an agreement] in co-operation with business, to finally prove that action on climate change can lead to growth, not just to costs."

Mr de Boer will leave for an advisory post with KPMG, the consultancy, and is in talks with universities including Yale and Utrecht on academic roles. He follows other prominent public sector officials with an interest in climate change who have taken jobs in the private sector, including Al Gore, former US vice-president.

Mr de Boer can boast a partial success to crown his career as a public servant: the Copenhagen Accord, which for the first time drew from both rich and poor countries pledges to limit their greenhouse gas emissions, and promised financial assistance from the developed to the developing world to do so.

The accord has been attacked by critics who argue that the emissions reduction commitments are -inadequate, and that the accord has little meaning as it is not a legally binding treaty.

His successor will have a tough task, facing stiff opposition from a wave of climate change scepticism, which has resurged in the wake of a series of scandals, including flaws in the data used by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. These include the citation of an untrue claim that the Himalayan glaciers would melt by 2035; experts think it will take much longer.

Editorial Comment, Page 10
