Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, September 11, 2010PRINCE'S CHALLENGE TO CLIMATE SCEPTICSLouise Gray Environment CorrespondentTHE Prince of Wales has criticised climate change sceptics for their "extraordinary" view that greenhouse gases are escaping into space rather than warming the planet.In a television interview yesterday, the Prince questioned the sceptics' belief that carbon emissions "just disappear through holes" in the atmosphere. Asked what he thought of people who denied climate change, he said they misunderstood the science."I find it quite extraordinary, because to me it seems only sensible to take a precautionary approach," he said. "There is something going very wrong."Scientists believe that greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide trap heat in the Earth's atmosphere, causing the "greenhouse effect". It is feared that if mankind continues to burn fossil fuels, the warming will cause catastrophic floods and droughts around the world. The Prince challenged the sceptics to offer another explanation for the warming climate."It may be very convenient to believe that somehow all these greenhouse gases we're pouring into the atmosphere just disappear through holes conveniently into space -- it doesn't work like that," he said.The Prince has campaigned on cutting greenhouse gases for more than 30 years.His latest initiative, Start, focuses on how ordinary people can make a difference through simple changes in their lifestyle. He has been touring the country to see projects where communities are growing fruit and vegetables in school playgrounds, cycling to work and installing solar panels at pensioners' homes.The Prince completed his tour at The Garden Party to Make a Difference yesterday, a festival to celebrate sustainable living in the grounds of his London residence, Clarence House.He showed visitors his own efforts to cut his carbon footprint.The Prince said people were more interested than ever in green living, citing the increase in bee-keeping and work on allotments."People have taken it on to themselves to try to do all these things because they get frustrated and they realise there is a huge challenge that we're facing," he said."We're putting nature's systems under huge strain and we can't go on like that if we want to hand over something reasonably worthwhile to our children and grandchildren."