The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) 
Tuesday, March 23, 2010
THE BIG IDEA
Roger Highfield
LAST year, the Met Office claimed the UK was "odds-on for a barbecue summer". The reality was a washout. Then came its predictions of a mild winter, when it was the coldest for three decades. Now another forecasting company predicts this year's summer will be sizzling. Can we believe them? I asked Prof Tim Palmer, now at Oxford University, who pioneered medium-range climate forecasts. He sighs, and says of the Met's forecasts that "we weren't promised a barbecue summer -- unfortunately, there was a certain amount of unnecessary spin placed on uncertain predictions".
Today, at the Royal Society in London, Prof Palmer has gathered experts to discuss how we should handle uncertainties. Among them is Lord May, who put chaos theory into biology.
Chaos rules the weather.
One can appreciate this with a mathematical structure called a Lorenz attractor, named after an American meteorologist. The lines depicting this structure never repeat their trajectory, just as the weather varies from day to day, but overall the lines form an owl-eye shape, just as our climate has regularities, notably warm summers and cold winters.
Although chaos theory limits the accuracy of weather predictions, we can still understand factors that influence the climate such as the greenhouse effect, predicted in 1827 by the French mathematician Joseph Fourier (1768-1830). The name arises because, like glass in a greenhouse, gases such as carbon dioxide and water vapour let solar energy in to warm the Earth but also trap some of the planet's heat. Without greenhouse gases, the ground temperature would be 30C lower.
The uncertainty in predictions of global warming have not changed much since pioneering work by the American Jule Charney in the Seventies, when he worked out the possible impact of climate change. His lower limit estimates - of 1.5 deg warming for a doubling of carbon dioxide levels - are similar to those from the latest climate models.
There is little uncertainty when it comes to explaining why the Earth is warming, says Prof Palmer. The big question is what happens next. Some scientists fear apocalyptic scenarios, others believe the change will be smooth. All agree, however, that there are major holes in our understanding.
"What has been naggingly difficult has been working out the upper limit of possible warming," says Prof Palmer. There is much debate among scientists, but among the public this comes over as "you are either a believer or non-believer in climate change, which is a false dichotomy".
There is endless pressure to simplify, he says. PR disasters such as the Met's seasonal forecast can result when uncertainty is rendered down to a soundbite. The Met had said it was "odds-on for a barbecue summer" in its press release, which had a greater ring of certainty than the actual 50 per cent probability of aboveaverage temperatures. Similarly, although the winter had a 50 per cent chance of being milder, there was a 20 per cent chance of being colder.
This month the Met Office abandoned these forecasts, where many variations on the same computer model of the climate are run to produce a fuzzy "ensemble" of forecasts, a method Prof Palmer popularised in New Scientist back in 1989. Palmer believes they are still valid. "The Met has been criticised too much."
Uncertainty is a part of everyday life. "The big issue is this," Prof Palmer explains. "When it comes to a catastrophic 4 deg average global warming, how big a probability would the public have to be faced with to back taking drastic action?" The failure to make the uncertainties of climate change crystal clear may be another reason why public confidence in climate science has slumped.
Roger Highfield is the Editor of 'New Scientist'

