 FT REPORT - INVESTING IN YOUNG PEOPLE, Friday, January 24, 2014 452 mots, p. 2

Innovators give voice to charity, climate and creativity
By Justin Cash

Nelson Rayner

New Zealand

Born in Australia and educated in New Zealand, Nelson Rayner, 28, was named the winner of Google's 2013 Young Innovators Award for his fundraising application Donate Your Desktop.

When users download the app, they allow advertising space on their computer to be rented out, with 75 per cent of the revenue generated going to a charity of their choice.

Amnesty, Oxfam New Zealand and the NZ Breast Cancer Foundation are some of the charities involved already.

"Originally, it was a campaign-based idea; that's the nature of the product," Mr Rayner says.

"Trying to market without a budget was a challenge, and everything had to be done from the bootstraps."

He is currently working on Little Lot, a mobile reincarnation of Donate Your Desktop that aims to channel more of the estimated $100bn spent on digital advertising into charitable causes.

"A lot of it is about having passion, not just a business head," Mr Rayner says. "My advice [for young entrepreneurs] would be to make sure you choose the right people from the start.

"Don't give away too much equity or spend too much cash. You've still got an obligation to your investors, even if you are young."

Esperanza Garcia

Philippines

As co-founder of the International Youth Council, an organisation formed at the UN to develop future world leaders, Esperanza Garcia, 26, is a passionate ambassador both for the environment and for the potential that young people have to tackle climate change.

A single mother since the age of 18, Ms Garcia was an official Filipino delegate at the UN's 2009 Copenhagen climate change conference, and has served as a consultant to the Philippine Senate's climate change committee - where she lobbied for renewable energy laws.

"Engaging with the youth of today, I have seen a generation with an increasingly strong sense of social and environmental awareness, one that is taking action," says the president of the Philippine Youth Climate Movement (PhilYCM). "Youth are not the leaders of tomorrow. We are the leaders of today."

She recognises the exceptional work of other young environmentalists through PhilYCM's Climate Hero award.

"Our goal is to mobilise youth all over the Philippines to take action on climate change," she says.

"Weneedto believe and prove that we are the great generation that will overcome this challenge."

Boniface Mwangi

Kenya

Photojournalist Boniface Mwangi was propelled to fame in 2007 when he captured images of the violence following Kenya's elections that year.

He became a visual artist, with an eye to using photography to spur social change.

In 2009, he founded Picha Mtaani, a street exhibition showcasing photographs of the post-election bloodshed across the country.

Picha Mtaani has spawned another social enterprise, Pawa254, a Nairobi-based community for young, creatively minded individuals.

Mr Mwangi says that youth movements are almost non-existent in Africa, apart from extremist, religious or women's groups.

"We are trying to build a movement in Kenya, but it will take time for it to have significant impact. A young person is more likely to end up in jail, a single mother, a substance addict or shot dead by police than get a job here."

The 30-year-old says young people need to be given reasons to believe in themselves and in their ability to shape the future of the nation.

"If young people can learn that their actions count no matter how small, then they will do something."

Profiles by Justin Cash
