  Saturday, March 29, 2014  Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 4 • 520 words 
 UN warns over climate change cost
  By Pilita Clark in London 

 Panel fears global GDP to feel 2% hitCrop yields likely to fall in warmer areas  The impacts of climate change  are already widespread and likely to cost up to $100bn a year to address, the most comprehensive assessment of global warming's effects in seven years is due to warn.  A summary of the latest report by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change , the world's leading climate authority, is being finalised by government officials and researchers in the Japanese city of Yokohama this weekend.  World gross domestic product could shrink up to 2 per cent if global temperatures rise by a widely predicted 2.5C, says a draft summary, dated March 25. Wheat, rice and maize crop yields are likely to decline in warmer regions in coming decades, though they may improve in cooler places in the short term.  Trying to figure out the costs of adapting to these impacts is still difficult but the price tag could range from $70bn to $100bn a year for developing countries alone, the draft says.  The summary for policy makers being finalised in Japan is the most closely watched section of the huge report due to be published on Monday. It sums up 30 underlying chapters that more than 300 authors from 70 countries have taken four years to complete.  It addresses the impacts of climate change, a subject that engulfed the Nobel Prize-winning IPCC in controversy after its last study in 2007 said the Himalayan glaciers could melt as early as 2035, a finding it later retracted.  A row has already broken out over this year's report, with one senior author taking the unusual step of asking for his name to be removed from what he says is an overly "alarmist" summary of the IPCC study.  Economist Professor Richard Tol from the University of Sussex said earlier drafts of the summary had emphasised the potential benefits of climate change and the prospect of successful adaptation.  However, the latest version highlighted the risks, including the "silly" finding that people in war zones were more vulnerable to climate change, he told the FT from Yokohama. "People in Syria may be vulnerable to climate change at the moment, but it's probably not their first priority," he said. "Reading this document you could come away thinking climate change is our biggest concern. I don't think that's true at all."  Prof Tol is a member of the academic advisory council of the Global Warming Policy Foundation , a British think-tank that frequently criticises the reliability   of climate science and the cost of policies to address global warming.  He has been criticised in turn by Bob Ward, one of the hundreds of reviewers who comment on the IPCC's assessments, from London's Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change and the Environment at the London School of Economics  "Professor Tol is wrong to describe the summary as alarmist because it simply summarises the state of knowledge from the existing literature," said Mr Ward. "He personally appears to believe that the risks posed by climate change are relatively small but he is on his own in believing that."  Mr Ward also complained to the IPCC in January that some of Prof Tol's research in the report contained small errors and played down the economic impact of climate change.  The panel's latest report is the second of three lengthy studies in its first big assessment of the climate in seven years. The first in September, on the science of climate change, concluded humans were "extremely likely" to be the main reason global temperatures had risen since the middle of the 20th century. A third report, on how to stop or reduce climate change, will be issued next month.  Many effects of climate change that the panel says are already evident can be seen in any suburban garden, as plants flower earlier and birds migrate home sooner. Other impacts are less visible, such as fish moving to cooler waters, acidifying oceans and melting glaciers.   