 Friday, January 10, 2014  Financial Times (FT.com) • 432 words 
 Scientists back David Cameron on weather link to global warming 
 By Clive Cookson  
Climate scientists have backed  David Cameron's statement that he "very much suspects" the recent extreme weather events Britain has suffered are linked to climate change.  The prime minister's words in the House of Commons this week annoyed some Conservative MPs who are sceptical about man-made climate change. But leading climate scientists told a press briefing in London on Friday that abnormal weather, such as the succession of storms that made December one of the UK's wettest and windiest on record, was occurring more frequently.  "I think [Mr Cameron] got the balance quite right in his statement," said Myles Allen, head of Oxford university's Climate Dynamics Group.  Peter Stott, head of climate monitoring at the Meteorological Office Hadley Centre, added: "Yes, there are more extreme rainfall and temperature events around the world.  "Yes, there is a mechanism by which climate change can increase rainfall, because there is 4 per cent more moisture in the atmosphere over the oceans than there was in the 1970s."  At the same time, the scientists said, as they usually do after an episode of extreme weather, that an individual event  could not be attributed definitely to climate change rather than random climate variability.  A new buzzword in climate science is "attribution" teasing out the factors contributing to a particular spell of weather. The Met Office is building up research in this area but Prof Allen said much more could be done.  "We do not need more pure research because we already understand these storms remarkably well. We need to take that understanding and apply it to attribution," he said. "We could probably develop an attributional system for a few million pounds a year, and then we could quantify to what extent human influence has made particular types of flooding more or less likely. It is scandalous that we can't answer these questions now."  In a region with such strong natural variability as the UK, no weather event has yet been so extreme that meteorologists can state categorically that it could not have occurred without man-made climate change. But the situation may be different elsewhere. "If you look at Australian   weather for the whole of 2013 [Australia's hottest year on record] it is really, really unlikely that we would have seen those temperature extremes in the absence of climate change," said Mr Stott.  In the US, where a polar vortex has brought extreme cold over the past week, sceptics have taken the opportunity to ridicule the idea of global warming.  But climate scientists have fought back with support from the White House. In a video message John Holdren, President Barack Obama's science adviser, said: "The extreme cold being experienced by much of the United States . . . is a pattern that we can expect to see with increasing frequency as global warming continues."  Fortunately, as January progresses, the extreme weather on both sides of the Atlantic is easing. North America is warming up and northwestern Europe is calming down. Today, for the first time in several weeks, the UK Met Office has no warnings about heavy rain or severe wind.   