 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR, Thursday, April 24, 2008 257 mots, p. 14

Complex tally of climate change mitigation gainers and losers

From Lord Turner of Ecchinswell.

Sir, Wilfred Beckerman (Letters, April 22) attacks the Stern review treatment of discount rates as "pathetically feeble". But it is instead Prof Beckerman's letter that proposes a simplistic and misleading approach to a complex issue.

Prof Beckerman defines the ethical issue as "how much certain sacrifice is one prepared to impose on people living today, most of whom are desperately poor, in the interest of future generations who are projected to be much richer". But nobody is proposing or should propose sacrifice by today's desperately poor people. The (relatively small, as it happens) economic sacrifice should initially be concentrated in the rich developed world. And analysis suggests that the future adverse consequences of climate change are likely to fall disproportionately on the world's poor people, many of whom are likely even in the late 21st century to have a standard of living below that of today's average European or American. To the extent that this is the case, the theoretically appropriate discount rate, as Prof Beckerman must know, should be not merely low but negative.

In fact, the balance of winners and losers from climate change mitigation is likely to be extremely complex, with some future gainers likely to be richer than today's average person but some poorer, and with estimates of who will be winners and losers needing to take account of the full range of climate change effects on human welfare, not just those that are measured in gross domestic product statistics. The appropriate overall discount rate should therefore in theory reflect detailed empirical assessment as well as inherently subjective ethical judgments. To derive a discount rate instead by assuming that the future winners from climate change mitigation are all rich and that those making current sacrifices are desperately poor is an absurd (and indeed feeble) simplification.

Adair Turner,

Chair,

Committee on Climate Change
