 WORLD NEWS, Monday, June 2, 2008 542 mots, p. 4

Climate bill points way to US carbon trading scheme
By Stephanie Kirchgaessner in Washington and Fiona Harvey in London

Senators will begin a debate in Washington today on proposals for climate-change legislation seen as a blueprint for a future US carbon-trading programme.

The US is the only developed country not to have ratified the Kyoto protocol, which instituted a worldwide system of greenhouse gas emissions trading. A US carbon-trading system would be the world's biggest and would vastly increase the global market in emissions.

Senator Joe Lieberman, co-sponsor of the bill, said it would sharply reduce his country's output of the gases responsible for climate change "and drive the technologies that will make us energy-independent".

The climate security bill would establish a cap on carbon emissions from industry, cutting greenhouse gases by 1.8 per cent a year between 2012 and 2050, based on 2005 levels. Companies covered by the bill, including electrical utilities and some transport and manufacturing groups, would be allowed to trade their emissions quotas with each other which, in theory, should encourage reduction of emissions at the lowest cost.

President George W. Bush has been staunchly opposed to the creation of a cap-and-trade programme, but the three main presidential contenders - Barack Obama and Hillary Clinton of the Democrats and the Republican John McCain - have all endorsed mandatory cuts to greenhouse gas emissions.

Point Carbon, a carbon market analyst company, forecast that the global emissions trading market would expand from $64bn (€41bn, £32bn) last year to more than $3,000bn by 2020 if the US took part.

While it is not likely to win sufficient votes to pass the Senate, it will be closely watched because the next Congress - expected to have a stronger Democratic majority - may well use it as a foundation for future legislation, which could pass as early as 2009 with the support of the next president.

Opponents of the bill - sponsored by the independent Mr Lieberman and the Republican John Warner - are expected to base their attack on claims that it would raise petrol prices and weaken US competitiveness.

Views on climate change have evolved on Capitol Hill since 2003, when global warming-related legislation proposed by Mr McCain received scant support. Since then, the political environment has changed. While the debate in Washington once revolved around the science of global warming, it now centres on policy. Evangelicals have also joined the debate, making stewardship of the Earth a moral issue.

But while the political climate has generally become more favourable, some observers say Democratic supporters of the bill are worried about the timing of this week's debate. In April, Harry Reid, the Democratic majority leader, said nearly all Democrats would back the cap-and-trade legislation. But now, Mr Reid might not be able to count on the support of moderate Democrats from states suffering because of high petrol prices and the weak economy.

Sherrod Brown, a Democrat from Ohio, has said he will oppose the bill because he believes that it does not take energy-sensitive industries, including chemical and steel foundries found in his state, into account.

Eric Washburn, a Democratic energy lobbyist, said: "Six months ago, when the bill was being drafted in the Senate, there was more political steam and expectations. There has been backsliding since then, given the high gas prices and recession. There is now more political trepidation about passing this than there was six months ago."

A group of environmental organisations that support the bill say it contains protections for families on low incomes and safeguards to ease the transition to a lower-carbon economy in the US. These include a rebate programme for utilities and tax relief.

Another provision would allow the import of cheaper carbon credits from developing countries.

Steve Cochran, campaign director at the New York-based Environmental Defense Fund, said: "Every credible assessment of cap-and-trade tells the same story: we can afford an ambitious climate policy if we act soon, and we can grow the economy at the same time." 