 LEX COLUMN, Saturday, April 5, 2008 251 mots, p. 16

Climate change risks

Like all bubbles, the climate change movement is sustained by a mix of substance and hysteria. Naturally, there are plenty of consultants advising companies how they should cope. In a report released this week, KPMG identified four risks businesses face from climate change: physical, regulatory, reputational and legal. It then compared exposure to these risks with the level of preparedness for different industries.

Such analysis is problematic. Irrespective of one's view on climate change, very long-term risk assessment is anathema to most companies, as KPMG acknowledges. Management incentive plans, not to mention the time horizons of even the most conservative institutional investors, are unable to confront risks beyond a few years. Even if they could, computer models or highly paid futurists cannot forecast outcomes with the accuracy needed to generate a measurable economic return.

There are shorter-term trends to consider, but navigating these risks is what shareholders expect from management. Most companies have already pushed environmental issues to the front of their homepages and annual reports. But tomorrow's concerns may be different. Just as Aids or developing-world poverty drifted from the forefront of public consciousness, the focus on climate change may dim if the global economic slowdown gathers pace. Then, say, how a company's workers are treated may be the hot topic.

Companies spend a lot protecting their reputation and trying to avoid litigation. Regulations are also monitored closely. But the intensity of all three risks is linked to the mood of the day. KPMG may be right that the tourism sector, in particular, fails to appreciate the physical effects of climate change. But the other risks are next to impossible to prepare for in the long run. One day food companies may find themselves on top of European regulation, only to discover a Hollywood actor has converted the entire US to veganism.
