 NATIONAL NEWS, Monday, December 1, 2008 402 mots, p. 2

Climate taskforce urges tough targets
By Fiona Harvey, Environment Correspondent

The government's climate change taskforce will today recommend that Britain adopt a more aggressive target for cutting greenhouse gases than the rest of the European Union.

It will also say that new coal-fired power stations would have to be built or retrofitted with carbon storage technology that is not expected to be in commercial use in the UK before 2015.

The climate change committee, chaired by Lord Turner, says the estimated £15bn a year cost of cutting emissions associated with the burning of fossil fuels is no reason to hold back on measures ranging from electrifying public transport to a large expansion of renewable energy.

It is advocating that by 2020 the UK should cut emissions by more than 26 per cent compared with 1990 levels. Exceeding the EU goal of a 20 per cent cut by this deadline is necessary, Lord Tur-ner will say, so the UK can meet its legal obligation of an 80 per cent cut by 2050.

Many of the measures needed to achieve the reductions will raise prices to consumers, at least in the short to medium term.

But Lord Turner will say that failing to tackle climate change now will lead to far higher costs in the medium and long term. He will also call for measures to protect the low-paid, pensioners and other vulnerable consumers from initial price rises.

The emission cuts are to be made in the framework of three five-year "carbon budgets" running to 2022. These show how far emissions must be cut and by when, implying drastic changes to the way government operates. "In a world with carbon budgets, every important decision will have to be made on the basis of whether it fits the budget, whether emissions savings can be made elsewhere, or whether it simply can't be done," Ed Miliband, secretary of state for energy and climate change, warned fellow ministers last week.

Other measures likely to be set out in the report include stricter enforcement of the 70mph speed limit on motorways and a national programme of home insulation, both of which save fuel.

But, in a disappointment to the government, the committee is cautious on the prospect for "green-collar jobs". "You have to bear in mind that if you are creating green jobs, you may be destroying jobs elsewhere," warns one official.

The report will not categorically rule out new coal-fired power stations, such as the one proposed at Kings-north, the first to be built in the UK in decades. But any new power station using the most carbon-intensive fuel would have to be built with carbon capture and storage or be fitted with the technology afterwards.

"Power companies are not planning to run unabated coal through the 2020s," one official said, adding that they expected to retrofit carbon capture and storage technology if it was not in-corporated from the outset.

Ministers will be able to justify plans for a third runway at Heathrow, but only if they can make substantial emission savings elsewhere.

The committee also urges stronger measures to "decarbonise" home heating.
Aussi paru dans
