 Foreign, Thursday, December 11, 2008 1001 mots, p. A 12

U.S. Transition Hampers Talks on Climate Change
By ELISABETH ROSENTHAL; Andrew C. Revkin contributed reporting from New York.

POZNAN, Poland - As ministers from 189 countries gather here in the coal mining regions of Poland to hammer out a new climate treaty, progress is being sorely hampered by the transition under way in American politics, delegates and experts here said.

No one expected a team representing President-elect Barack Obama to attend these meetings -- he has said there is but one president at a time, and the United States is still represented here by the Bush administration. But the anticipation of his presidency has left this critical meeting in a bit of limbo.

Mr. Obama has called climate change "a matter of urgency," promising to seek legislation to cut greenhouse gas emissions sharply and to increase United States participation in global climate initiatives. But many countries are still waiting to size up Mr. Obama's actual environmental commitment before making bold moves of their own.

"It has affected the meeting in a fairly significant way," said Gus Silva-Chavez, a policy expert at the Environmental Defense Fund in Washington, who has been observing the closed negotiations. "A lot of people think: 'This is not the time to put our cards on the table. Let's wait for the new administration. Why agree to anything now?' "

This problem is exacerbated by the fact that the European Union is itself struggling to finalize its own climate package this week -- hampered by the global economic turndown -- and so its delegates have been unusually quiet here.

"We have a sense of urgency, but you don't see any strong decisions" being made here, said Elenita Dano, a member of the Philippines delegation. "Political developments in the U.S. and the E.U. are holding us hostage, and we have no choice but to wait."

The current negotiations are meant to culminate in a treaty in Copenhagen in December 2009, to take effect in 2013. It will replace industrialized nations' commitments to reduce emissions under the Kyoto Protocol, which expires in 2012. The United States never ratified that agreement, and its binding terms do not apply to China, India, and other emerging powers that are projected to account for nearly all growth in emissions in the next few decades.

So far Mr. Obama has outlined a number of broad policies but provided few specifics or a timetable for implementing his ideas. He could propose a climate bill, but the kind of cap-and-trade system preferred by Mr. Obama for greenhouse gases would, by many estimates, take at least a year or two to hash out even with a Democratic majority in both houses of Congress.

"The fear is this could become a Clinton health plan, trying to do too much too soon, and ending up with nothing," said Paul Bledsoe, a former Clinton White House staff member who is now with the National Commission on Energy Policy.

On the other hand, short-term measures that would be easier to enact, like energy initiatives in an economic stimulus spending package, could be perceived by Europe and China, particularly, as insufficient evidence of meaningful change.

Even at the highest levels, officials here are awaiting results: "Another climate treaty without the U.S. doesn't make a lot of sense," said Yvo de Boer, head of the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, the meeting's sponsor.

There are ample signs that the United States can do little of substance in these talks because of the presidential transition. In an interview several days ago, James L. Connaughton, the chairman of the White House Council on Environmental Quality, said the Bush administration climate team was committed to keeping all options open for the incoming Obama administration -- in essence saying that the American negotiators in Poznan had little room to make commitments.

"We have taken ideas very extensively from many people who are currently senior advisers to the Obama team on how to think through creative future approaches," he said.

Still, the conference has achieved a few important goals. The delegates have agreed on a method for essentially paying countries and communities for preserving forests, through a system of carbon credits. Twenty percent of man-made carbon-dioxide emissions are attributed to deforestation. The delegates are also nearing agreement on a fund, conceptualized a year ago, to help developing nations adapt to climate change.

Expectations for the talks here were always muted, because Poznan was meant to be a midpoint meeting that would lead to a new climate treaty by next December.

Negotiators may yet be on track to meet that goal. "If the pace picks up we could get an agreement by Copenhagen," said Angela Anderson, director of the International Global Warming Campaign of the Pew Environment Group.

On Thursday, government ministers arrive for two days of meetings to work out a final set of documents, to guide the process through the next year. A Congressional delegation, as always, is observing the talks, with senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts, assigned to report back to Mr. Obama.

Against the backdrop of a global recession, there were signs that delegates of industrialized nations wanted to back away from ambitious emission reduction targets that had been discussed last year, based on research by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

Under the panel's scenarios, industrialized countries would have to reduce emissions by 25 to 40 percent by 2020 to set the world on a track to avert disastrous warming, numbers that went in and out of the draft proposal over the course of Wednesday. Countries like Italy have suggested they might have a hard time meeting previous emissions reductions goals in the current economic climate.

In addition, a group of developing countries called the G-77 complained that their proposals to help poor countries combat climate change generally fell on deaf ears. "We got no support from developed countries whether in technology transfer or finances," said Tasneem Essop, of the World Wide Fund for Nature of South Africa.

Such hopes and frustrations presaged great pressure on the new American administration. Said Jake Schmidt of the Natural Resources Defense Council, who participated in a panel discussion here: "Clearly one of the major stumbling blocks has been a lack of leadership at the U.S. level, and that's about to change," he said.

But the incoming Obama administration is currently weighing its options, including whether there should be a climate czar, or cabinet-level environment position, said a person who is familiar with the transition.

Domestically, the person said, the administration is looking toward a three-pronged approach. First there is a stimulus package that will include "green" initiatives like retrofitting buildings with better insulation. Then there is an energy bill that will include components like new fuel standards and tax breaks for investments in environmental technology and renewable energy.

Finally, there is the cap-and-trade system, in which companies are assigned emissions limits and must effectively buy permits to exceed them.

Dirk Forrister, the chairman of the White House Climate Change Task Force under the Clinton administration, said such a complicated program probably could not become operational before 2014.

Tim Wirth, head of the United Nations Foundation, based in Washington, said that finalizing a new climate program would take time, but that the new administration should immediately start creating the "building blocks" -- forging agreements with countries like China to cooperate on energy efficiency.

"Everybody is waiting for the U.S. cavalry to come over the ridge," he said. "We're a major component but not the only component."
