

Financial Times
Letters, Saturday, March 6, 2021 299 mots, p. 8

Public information campaigns can help ﬁght the climate
crisis
Letters

The subtitle to Pilita Clark's excellent article ("Climate warriors", Books Essay, FT Weekend, February 27)
claims "global warming has made environmentalists of us all" and "debate still rages over what is the best
solution". The ﬁrst is true only until we have to pay more, as evidenced by the UK fuel duty, frozen since 2011.
On the second, there is near-unanimity — excepting Jonathan Franzen's presumption of failure — that the
goal   is   net-zero   emissions,   and   that   piecemeal   policies   or   individual   do-gooding   are   no   substitute   for
effective,   broad   collective   action   such   as   carbon   pricing.   No   serious   expert   would   disagree   with   the
usefulness of a rising carbon price. Yet policies for next year, rather than the next decade, are timid and
inadequate, for fear of tabloid campaigns or gilets jaunes.

As Clark states, "more political will" is needed, and in a democracy this in turn needs the space created by
more   public   acceptance   of   the   necessary   measures.   But   as   fuel   duty   shows,   our   "environmentalism"   is
currently disconnected from an understanding of what is needed to realise it.

This apparent impasse is ﬁxable, and government has the means to ﬁx it.

Governments have spent liberally informing us about the dangers of Covid-19 or Aids. Why should they not
do   so   for   the   vastly   greater   threat   of   climate change?   All   preconditions   are   given:   a   real   danger;   the
government in possession of better information than most of the population; and a debate which, left to
itself, is regularly distorted by vested interests.

While   no   cure-all,   a   concerted   communication/engagement   campaign   can   only   increase   public
understanding and acceptance of meaningful policies, and hence create more political space. Ministers'
current inaction is costing us dearly, by preventing more effective and cost-effective climate policies. James
Denman Berlin, Germany

