

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
Editorial, Sunday, February 7, 2021 1476 mots, p. SR 6

The Task Ahead for Biden on Climate

By The Editorial Board

The new president has shown a welcome interest in combating climate change. But more will need to be
done.

After four years of scorn, the issue of climate change has risen near the top of the American political agenda,
where it deserves to be and where, even accounting for the efforts of Presidents Bill Clinton and Barack
Obama, it had never been.

That is the happy message contained in the blizzard of executive orders and press brieﬁngs emanating from
the Biden White House over the past couple of weeks. Put simply, the richest and most powerful nation in
the world is back in the ﬁght to rescue the planet from the ﬁres, ﬂoods, famines, rising sea levels, human
dislocations and other consequences of a warming globe.

Though less noticed, there was one other uplifting development with important implications for the climate
that had little to do with President Biden. That was the announcement from General Motors' chief executive,
Mary Barra, that the company is getting out of the internal combustion game and plans to sell only zero-
emission cars and trucks by 2035. The company has already invested $27 billion to introduce 30 electric
models in the next four years and will build a plant in Ohio to make the batteries for these vehicles.

G.M.'s move was in part a competitive response to Volkswagen and other foreign automakers, including ones
in China, that have announced fundamental shifts toward electric vehicles. It ﬁts nicely with some of Mr.
Biden's   climate   goals,   including   zeroing   out   greenhouse   gas   emissions   in   America   by   midcentury.
Importantly,   it   is   also   a   reminder   of   the   power   of   free   market   forces,   without   whose   constructive
engagement -- and the private investments necessary to build out clean vehicles and clean energy sources
like wind and solar -- the climate crisis cannot be solved. No government, however committed, can go it
alone.

Mr. Biden's executive orders on climate were nonetheless important. They do not have the permanence or
bipartisan imprimatur of laws, and are subject to reversal by later administrations, but they send powerful
policy signals to the federal bureaucracy. One needs only think back to the early Trump days, when a suite of
executive orders aimed at delivering on Donald Trump's boastful promise of "energy independence" -- which
in fact the country had mostly achieved -- consumed various federal agencies for the next few years. This led
to   weaker   regulations   on   coal-ﬁred   power   plants   and   methane   emissions,   decimated   clean   water
protections, gave over large swaths of public land to oil and gas exploration and shrank two magniﬁcent
national monuments designated by Mr. Clinton and Mr. Obama. It is these actions -- which, along with Mr.
Trump's contempt for science, cost the country four years in what is essentially a race against time -- that Mr.
Biden, in his executive orders, is telling his cabinet ofﬁcers to review and reverse.

In many cases, that won't be easy. To take one example, Mr. Trump's Environmental Protection Agency
followed a legal path that took more than two years and involved many complex technical studies in order to
roll back Mr. Obama's rule ordering automakers to rapidly increase fuel economy standards, thus reducing
tailpipe emissions of carbon dioxide. The same laborious timetable now awaits Mr. Biden's E.P.A. as it seeks
to reinstate the Obama standards. Similar obstacles will complicate efforts to restore rules on methane
emissions and the broad protections of the Clean Water Act narrowed by Mr. Trump.

On   the   plus   side,   the   president   can   fairly   quickly   restore   the   original   boundaries   of   the   shrunken
monuments, a matter that lies within presidential jurisdiction, and possibly prevent drilling from proceeding
in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge. Of course, nothing prevents Mr. Biden from acting unilaterally on
matters within his powers, as he has in rejoining the Paris Agreement on climate change and canceling a
problematical oil pipeline from Canada. The moratorium he announced last month on new oil and gas
leasing on public lands and waters is similarly within his writ.



In the short run, that's a mere annoyance to the oil companies; only one-ﬁfth of the nation's oil and gas is

 



produced on public lands and waters, and the industry is sitting on a cache of roughly 13.4 million acres of
undeveloped federal leases. It is also a disappointment to environmental groups that remain ﬁxated on
ending hydraulic fracturing not tomorrow but yesterday. But it is a welcome ﬁrst step toward satisfying Mr.
Biden's campaign pledge to transition from fossil fuels, and one of many recent signs -- Ms. Barra's G.M.
pledge being another -- that fossil fuels' hegemony is slowly coming to an end.


One of the president's ﬁrst moves was to name John Kerry, a former secretary of state who helped broker
negotiations   at   the   Paris   climate   conference   in   2015,   as   his   international   climate   envoy,   charged   with
restoring America's credibility on the issue. In part because of Mr. Trump's intransigence, the United States
has struggled to meet its commitment in Paris to reduce emissions by 26 to 28 percent below 2005 levels by
2025; with the help of the coronavirus pandemic, which disrupted the economy, emissions have dropped by
20 percent, according to Rhodium, a consulting group. But the longer-term trajectory was not encouraging,
even with the dramatic drop in the costs of renewable fuels, the closing of many coal-ﬁred power plants and
the determined efforts of states and cities to ﬁll the void left by the federal government.

America is hardly alone. Only a handful of the nearly 200 countries that signed on to the Paris Agreement
have met their targets; among big emitters, the nations of the European Union come the closest. But even if
every country does meet its targets, it will not be enough, not by a long shot -- a scary truth that the Paris
negotiators acknowledged at the time and that an alarming 2018 report from the U.N.'s Intergovernmental
Panel on Climate Change conﬁrmed. The report warned that to avoid the worst effects of climate change,
the   world   would   have   to   hold   increases   in   atmospheric   temperatures   to   1.5   degrees   Celsius   above
preindustrial levels. In practical terms, this means a carbon-emission-free world by 2050, which in turn
requires a downward wrench in global emissions by 2030. Some experts believe that for the United States to
carry its share of the load, it will have to cut emissions by 40 to 50 percent over the next decade.

On April 22, Earth Day, the United States will host a Climate Leaders Summit. The expectation is that Mr.
Kerry will unveil a different set of targets. Those numbers have to be more than ambitious. They also have to
be credible -- meaning, as Robert Stavins, a longtime climate scholar at Harvard puts it, "truly achievable
given existing and reasonably anticipated policy actions."

Rolling back all of Mr. Trump's rollbacks on fossil fuel emissions, however necessary that is, simply won't cut
it. What might cut it is major new climate legislation that encourages serious investment dollars -- in millions
of emissions-free vehicles, in hundreds of thousands of new charging stations to service those vehicles, in a
reimagined electric grid carrying power from plants that rely not on fossil fuels but on rapidly growing
renewable sources, in a cleaner public transportation system and in millions and millions of weatherized
homes.

All that and more was envisioned in a $2 trillion climate plan presented by none other than Mr. Biden in a
speech in his home state of Delaware last summer. His problem is therefore not lack of imagination. It is the
political reality of a divided Senate that cannot bring itself to approve a plan to help ordinary people and local
governments weather the economic storms of the pandemic. If America's legislators cannot deal with a
present emergency, how likely is it that they can be persuaded to address a more remote one?

The president's pitch to Mitch McConnell, the Senate minority leader, is that a credible climate plan   will
create the jobs the pandemic has destroyed, and many more. Let's hope it works.

In the meantime, it seems enough to celebrate what, as if in a fairy tale, has appeared in the White House: a
president who cares about the climate and other environmental issues, who has gathered around him
serious people, who has determined to follow science where it leads and who will try to do good and useful
things.

