What can help fight climate change? More whale poop, study suggests eu.usatoday.com/story/news/world//08/whale-poop-can-help-fight-climate-change/6341472001 Jordan Mendoza | USA TODAY The popular children's book "Everyone Poops" details what every human and animal does. But what the book may not detail is that one animal's waste is actually good for the environment. Marine researchers say baleen whales, some of the largest animals on Earth that include the blue, gray and humpback whales, eat more than had been thought. But what goes in must come out, and what comes out of these massive whales actually gives back to the ecosystem. In 2008, a study published on whales eating off the coast of British Columbia to Mexico found that whales required about 2 million tons of food a year, with a diet that includes fish, squid, krill and zooplankton. But research published in the journal Nature on Wednesday determined the amount was much more. The team, led by marine ecologist and Stanford postdoctoral fellow Matthew Savoca, used data from whales tracked in the Atlantic, Pacific and Southern oceans from 2010 to 2019. The whales were tagged with smartphone-like devices to track their movements, along with drone photography and boats equipped with echo sounds to detect the size of potential whale food. By determining a whale's growth, how often it ate and how much food there was, the results more than doubled the findings from 2008. For example, the North Pacific blue whale, which can grow up to 90 feet and weigh more than 100,000 pounds, ate about 16 tons of krill a day. That would equal 5,840 tons a year. Other whales included the North Atlantic right whale and bowhead whale eating more than 1,825 tons of zooplankton a year. Eating more than thought means the whales also poop more than thought. But that poop helps out oceans because of the nutrients, like iron, it contains. Because whales usually defecate near the ocean surface, the nutrients inside help bloom carbon-absorbing   phytoplankton that "form the base of ocean food-webs." "Consider that whales are acting as mobile krill processing plants," Savoca said in a statement. "These are animals the size of a Boeing 737, eating and pooping far from land in a system that is iron-limited in many places." What researchers want people to learn from the study is that the world needs whales. Numerous types of whales were hunted throughout the 20th century, damaging a population that has yet to fully recover. One of the rarest whales, the North Atlantic right whale, had its population drop to 336 in 2020, the lowest it had been in nearly two decades. `Very chunky': Great white shark leaves researchers in awe Watch: Fearless seagull surfs on the back of a southern right whale While whaling has been banned in most countries with the exception of Japan, Iceland and Norway, whales are still struggling with climate change. Rising ocean temperatures could mean less food would be available. "Our results say that if we restore whale populations to pre-whaling levels seen at the beginning of the 20th century, we'll restore a huge amount of lost function to ocean ecosystems," said Nicholas Pyenson, co-author and curator of fossil marine mammals at the Smithsonian's National Museum. "It may take a few decades to see the benefit, but it's the clearest read yet about the massive role of large whales on our planet." Further analysis supports the need for whales as the amount of krill in places like the Southern Ocean have significantly dropped since the early 1900s. The amount of nutrients in poop also has dropped since then. All wrapped up together, more whales means more krill, and more krill means more ocean-benefiting poop. "Our results suggest the contribution of whales to global productivity and carbon removal was probably on par with the forest ecosystems of entire continents, in terms of scale," Pyenson said. "Helping whales recover could restore lost ecosystem functioning and provide a natural climate solution." Follow Jordan Mendoza on Twitter: @jordan_mendoza5.   