Climate change may push polar bears to the brink of extinction within 100 years, study says    Doyle Rice | USA TODAY  All but a few polar bear populations would collapse by 2100, the study found. The bears' habitat of sea ice is predicted to decline to such an extent that the animals will be food deprived. As Arctic sea ice declines in response to warming temperatures, polar bears must fast for longer periods.  All but a few polar bears in the Arctic will likely be gone by the end of the century, a new study suggests, unless measures are taken to reduce the production of greenhouse gases that cause global warming.  The bears' habitat of sea ice is predicted to decline to such an extent that the animals will be deprived of food.   "Ultimately, the bears need food and in order to have food, they need ice," Péter Molnár, an assistant professor at the University of Toronto Scarborough and one of the authors of the study, told CNN. "But in order for them to have ice, we need to control climate change."  Polar bears rely on sea ice to hunt, and when the ice is absent, they are forced onto land where they cannot find food. As Arctic sea ice declines in response to warming temperatures, polar bears must fast for longer periods.   Prolonged fasting periods have been linked to reduced body condition, reproduction and survival in some polar bear populations, the study found. Continued sea ice loss ultimately threatens polar bear survival Arctic-wide.   "Previously, we knew that polar bears would ultimately disappear unless we halt greenhouse gas rise. But knowing when they will begin to disappear in different areas is critical for informing management and policy – and inspiring action,” said the University of Wyoming's Steven Amstrup, who conceived the project and is a co-author of the study.   Amstrup is also the chief scientist at Polar Bears International, a conservation organization dedicated to polar bears.      The authors modeled polar bear survival under a high greenhouse-gas emissions scenario, which, if it occurs, would mean that all but a few polar bear populations would collapse by 2100, the study found.  Greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane are produced from the burning of fossil fuels such as oil, gas and coal.   "Showing how imminent the threat is for different polar bear populations is another reminder that we must act now to head off the worst of future problems faced by us all,” said Amstrup.   The study was published Monday in the peer-reviewed British journal Nature Climate Change.   More: Recent Siberian heat wave 'almost impossible' without climate change, study says  Read this: Arctic will see ice-free summers by 2050 as globe warms, study says      