ON THE FRONT LINES:
CLIMATE CHANGE THREATENS THE
HEALTH OF AMERICA’S WORKERS

AUTHORS
Juanita Constible
Bora Chang
Clare Morganelli
Nikole Blandon

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
The authors are grateful to Dave Bates, president of Hailstone Communications, for collecting firsthand accounts of
climate-related health harms from affected union members.
Peter Colavito, Marc Boom, and Shanna Devine provided essential strategic guidance and connections to labor
unions and occupational health and safety experts.
We also appreciate constructive feedback from the following report reviewers (listed alphabetically): Valerie Baron,
Marc Boom, Charlotte Brody, Peter Colavito, Kathryn Conlon, Jessica Eckdish, Anna Fendley, Kim Knowlton, Vijay
Limaye, Steve Sallman, Jennifer Sass, Leah Stecher, Katie Tracy, Neelu Tummala, Dan West, and Marguerite Young.
Finally, thank you to the many professionals at the National Council of Occupational Safety and Health (NCOSH)
and affiliated groups; contributors to Public Citizen’s Heat Stress Network; and members and leaders of the
American Federation of Teachers (AFT), Communications Workers of America (CWA), and Service Employees
International Union (SEIU) who shaped our thinking, pointed out resources that were unknown to us, and shared
their personal stories. 

About NRDC
The Natural Resources Defense Council is an international nonprofit environmental organization with more than 3 million members and online
activists. Since 1970, our lawyers, scientists, and other environmental specialists have worked to protect the world’s natural resources, public
health, and the environment. NRDC has offices in New York City, Washington, D.C., Los Angeles, San Francisco, Chicago, Montana, and Beijing.
Visit us at nrdc.org.

Executive Summary
Millions of workers in the United States get injured or sick on the job every year, and
thousands die.1
 Although the rates of occupational injuries and deaths have declined
since the Occupational Safety and Health Administration was established in 1971,
workers still face countless hazards—from the physical stress of repetitive motions to
chainsaw accidents to landslides.2
Climate change is already making existing workplace hazards worse and creating
new ones, and the situation will only accelerate as our world gets even hotter and our
weather more extreme.3
 Outdoor workers will be exposed to more severe heat, more
toxic substances, and a heightened risk of infectious diseases. As increasingly extreme
weather events destroy infrastructure and threaten communities, first responders and
cleanup crews will face ever more frequent, exhausting, and dangerous deployments.
And as the world grapples with the magnitude of the climate crisis and the societal
upheaval it causes, workers across the occupational spectrum may have to provide aid
to colleagues or to people in their care who find themselves in mental distress. 

To better understand the scope and scale of the dangers
climate change poses to occupational health and safety,
NRDC scoured government databases, media reports,
and the latest peer-reviewed scientific studies relevant
to climate change and workers. We also talked to labor
leaders, occupational health and safety experts, and union
members about their personal experiences with climaterelated threats to their health.
We found through our literature review and reporting that:
n	 The people we depend on to harvest our food, fix
our houses and roads, and keep essential services
running are among the most vulnerable workers to
heat-related illnesses and deaths. As Robert Hogue,
a telephone line technician in Southern California put
it: “We’re always trying to keep customers’ telephone
service alive, but it’s exhausting work and can cause heat
illness. Heat exhaustion can hit you when you’re climbing
a telephone pole or crawling under a house or through an
attic.”
n	 Indoor workers aren’t immune to the health and
safety effects of climate change. This is particularly
true for teachers, janitors, and other people who spend
time in older or poorly maintained buildings. Pam
Rall-Johnston, a night-shift janitor in Pittsburgh, said,
“Growing up, the climate was very different. We never
had air-conditioning; now you can’t survive without it
. . . Some of the buildings we work in are more than 100
years old, and they turn the air-conditioning off at night.
It often gets over 90 degrees and extremely humid in
the buildings, and it’s tough to do physical labor in those
conditions.”
n	 Climate-related losses in take-home pay—
particularly among lower-wage workers—make
it harder to afford food and health care. After
Hurricane Florence hit North Carolina in 2018, Gina
Williams told us, “I work in a garment factory, and
some of my coworkers had to miss three weeks of work
because the roads were unusable, which was a financial
burden on top of the losses we’d all experienced.”
n	 There’s an urgent need for more research on how
the effects of climate change, including exposure
to wildfire smoke, impact occupational health and
safety. Shawn Heape, a communications worker in
Northern California, worried about the health effects
of spending 20 years around wildfires. “My coworkers
and I get nosebleeds,” he said, “and when we blow our
noses black mucus comes out. Then we’re going home to
our children and spouses covered in all those poisonous
chemicals . . . I’m afraid of what my family and I have
been exposed to over the years.”
Unfortunately, federal labor laws and the
practices of most employers have not kept pace
with our changing climate. These laws and
practices will be woefully insufficient for the
effects that even a best-case scenario of climate
change would have on worker health and safety.
In addition to urgent and ambitious action to eliminate
climate-changing pollution, NRDC recommends that federal
lawmakers and regulators take the following steps to adapt
workplaces to an increasingly climate-disrupted world:
n	 Modernize our health and safety laws and policies
to address the realities of the climate crisis and ensure
that enforcement funding and staffing are up to the
challenge of protecting workers.
n	 Strengthen the role of unions and other worker
organizations to ensure workers are full partners in
the effort to protect their health and safety from climate
change.
n	 Build a better system to track, analyze, and quickly
act on existing and emerging health and safety
threats to workers.
n	 Support research on the best health and safety
interventions to protect worker health from climate
change.

We spend a lot of time at work: In 2018, on average,
employed Americans spent more than half of their waking
hours working, commuting to and from work, or looking
for work.4
 When talking about health, we cannot ignore the
crucial role that work plays in the lives of most adults and
many teenagers in the United States.5
Different industries and forms of employment place
different stresses on the health of workers.6
 For example,
the occupational fatality rate for grounds maintenance
workers, who labor outdoors with dangerous equipment,
is 37 times higher than for people who work in finance.7
Temporary and informally employed workers are more
susceptible to occupational injuries and illnesses than
are permanent employees because they often have less
work experience, are unfamiliar with their workplaces,
get inadequate health and safety training, are assigned the
most dangerous jobs, or are fired for requesting or taking
time off.8
 And, as discussed further below, immigrant
workers face myriad health and safety challenges on
the job, particularly if they are undocumented and fear
retaliation for reporting illness or unsafe conditions.9
Work is also considered a “social determinant of health”
because wages and benefits such as health insurance are
a key factor in workers’ ability to pay for safe housing,
nutritious food, and medical care.10 In fact, the American
College of Physicians considers socioeconomic status
to be the “primary nonmedical factor affecting health.”11
However, just 55 percent of workers had employer-based
health insurance in 2019, even though employer-based
plans are the most common source of health insurance
in the United States.12 The availability, quality, and cost
of employer-based health insurance also vary widely by
business size, geographic location, and proportion of lowwage workers.13
The climate crisis is adding to the existing health and
safety vulnerabilities of workers in three key ways. First,
climate change is worsening both day-to-day weather
conditions and extreme events such as wildfires,
floods, and hurricanes. Weather-related workplace
hazards that already harm worker health—including
exposure to extreme heat, toxic air and water pollution,
infectious diseases, and storm debris—are intensifying
across a wide array of occupations. As Mark Burleson
(Spotlight 1), a fiber-optic technician in Florida, put it, “It
didn’t used to be this hot, but in recent years I’ve seen a lot
of guys get overheated and dehydrated.”
Second, climate change is economically devastating
whole communities. Disasters can cut into take-home pay
by shuttering businesses, disrupting commuting routes,
and reducing the number of hours and days during which
people can safely work. After Hurricane Michael closed the
laundry at which she worked in 2018, said Ashley Williams
(Spotlight 2), “it was a real struggle to support my family.
My car got repossessed, and I had to choose between paying
my utility bills or the rent.”

SPOTLIGHT 1: MARK BURLESON, FIBER-OPTIC TECHNICIAN, CWA LOCAL 3176, OVIEDO, FLORIDA
“As fiber-optic technicians, we connect businesses to high-speed internet service. To do this, we often have to block off an area in the middle
of a six-lane highway and open up a 300-pound manhole lid made of cast iron. Then we pump the water out of the tunnel and climb down
underneath the highway to snake the fiber-optic cable through the conduit system to the business’s computer server room. In central Florida
the summers have gotten horrendously hot, so the asphalt is sizzling and the tunnels can get up to 112 degrees [Fahrenheit].
“I’ve been a line technician for 40 years and started out setting telephone poles in the ground, climbing up, and hanging the copper wire. It
didn’t used to be this hot, but in recent years I’ve seen a lot of guys get overheated and dehydrated. They get nauseous, their body shuts down,
they stop sweating, their skin gets cold and clammy, and they get the shakes. When this happens, I try to get them to a cooler location and get
liquid into them, but you have to give them water slowly because otherwise they can throw it up.
“Along with the heat, there are more intense storms and hurricanes, which threaten service for customers because the lines get flooded and
corroded. We have to cut out all the damaged cables and junction boxes and replace them. Sometimes in the aftermath of storms, we’ve worked
18 to 20 hours a day and slept in our trucks. We wouldn’t go home for weeks until service was restored for our customers.
“I’m a fourth-generation Floridian, so I know firsthand that it’s getting hotter and we’re hit by more storms. My grandmother was 91 when she
died, and had only seen one hurricane in this part of the state during her lifetime. I’m 62 and have seen seven or eight hurricanes already. I was
born and raised without air-conditioning, and now there are so many 100-plus degree days, I don’t think you could make it without AC. I pity the
younger guys coming up who have to work in these conditions. My heart goes out to them.”

SPOTLIGHT 2: ASHLEY WILLIAMS, LAUNDRY WORKER, WORKERS UNITED SOUTHERN REGION, SEIU,
TALLAHASSEE, FLORIDA
“The increasing heat in Florida makes it hard to work in my industrial laundry, but the storms hurt my ability to make a living because they shut
down the businesses that need laundry services.
“I’m a single mom raising three kids ages sixteen, nine, and six. I make $12.55 an hour at the laundry, folding and assembling items once they’re
clean so they can be wrapped and shipped out to customers. We clean hotel and restaurant linens, hospital sheets and scrubs, and uniforms for
city workers. Inside our laundry, it can reach temperatures over 105 degrees in the summer, so it’s tough and exhausting work. I’ve stayed with
it for 10 years because normally it provides a steady income at 40 hours a week so I can support my family.
“That changed when Hurricane Michael hit in 2018. Michael was a category five and caused so much flooding and damage that many of the
businesses that use our laundry were shut down, especially in Panama City on the Gulf Coast. The entire local economy took a hit. Our laundry
closed for three days because the area lost power, but when the lights came back on, we could only work half days due to the loss of business.
“So I only had around 26 hours a week at the laundry and had to find other work. I started a second job with an app-based food delivery service
at night. I would get off from the laundry around 12:30 p.m. and then deliver food from 5 p.m. to about 11 p.m. Sometimes I only made around
$10 an hour at the delivery job, and it was a real struggle to support my family. My car got repossessed, and I had to choose between paying my
utility bills or the rent. The only reason we weren’t homeless was that I paid my other bills late every month.
“When I was working that schedule, my mom had to come up from Miami to assist with the kids and stay with them at night. My children barely
got to see me, which was really hard on them. When they were going to school I was going to work at the laundry, when they came home I was
going to my delivery job, and then when I finally got home at night they were asleep. I wasn’t even able to help them with their homework. Once
my youngest daughter said to me, ‘We never get to see you anymore,’ and it broke my heart. The drastic changes in the climate are causing
insecurity and hardship for working families.”
Finally, our rapidly changing climate is outstripping
the ability of state and federal agencies to hold
employers accountable for unsafe and unhealthy
work practices. Major labor laws, such as the 1970’s
Occupational Safety and Health Act, were drafted before
most lawmakers were aware of the impacts of climate
change and are not being used to their full advantage to
protect workers.14 Recent rollbacks of state and federal
occupational safeguards and funding cuts for legal
enforcement already threaten increasing numbers of
workers with occupational illnesses, injuries, and death,
and the added risks from climate change only exacerbate
the problem.15
This report reviews the latest evidence documenting how
climate change is threatening the health and safety of
workers, identifies research needs, and offers a series of
federal policy recommendations to protect workers in an
increasingly climate-disrupted world. We also share stories
from workers across the United States who offer their
personal experiences of climate-related health and safety
harms and share their fears about—and hopes for—the
future. 
“Workers are often exposed to conditions that the general public can elect to avoid.”
—Max Kiefer et al., “Worker Health and Safety and Climate Change in the Americas: Issues and Research Needs”16
Health Threats
Exposure to extreme heat can cause a range of mild to
deadly conditions, from heat rashes and muscle cramps to
heart attacks and heatstroke.26
There is also emerging evidence that extreme heat can
increase the risk of injuries on the job, by making workers
irritable or confused or by interfering with balance,
motor control, or even vision.27 A recent study of outdoor
agricultural workers in Washington State found the
odds of traumatic injury were 13 percent higher on days
with a maximum humidity index above safe occupational
thresholds.28 (Similar to the heat index, the humidity
index is a measure that combines heat and humidity.) In an
international study of 139 workers, heat stress combined
with dehydration was associated with a 4 percent decline
in performance on a simple cognitive task and a 16 percent
decline in performance on a complex motor task.29
Climate Disruption Is a Present and Growing Danger
to Worker Health
Climate disruption can be a matter of life or death for
people who work without protection from the elements
either outdoors or indoors.17 The occupations most highly
exposed to the types of weather extremes fueled by climate
change—such as buildings and grounds maintenance
workers, transportation and materials-moving workers,
and farmworkers—tend to be overrepresented by Blacks
or African Americans, Hispanics or Latinos, and low-wage
workers.18 Facts like these underscore how the climate
crisis will exacerbate existing environmental and social
injustices among underserved communities in the United
States.
These workers face extreme heat, floods, hurricanes,
wildfires, and droughts and the myriad health risks that
come from working in those conditions. The physical,
mental, and financial burdens of climate-related health
threats—from heatstroke to Lyme disease to depression
and anxiety—are real and urgent and must be addressed.
EXTREME HEAT IS KILLING WORKERS
The average annual temperature of the contiguous United
States increased 1.8 degrees Fahrenheit over roughly the
past century.19 Because warming happens unevenly, average
temperature increases of up to 3 °F have occurred in areas
such as Southern California, western Colorado, northern
North Dakota, and much of New Jersey.20 Heat waves have
also gotten longer, more frequent, and more intense in
recent decades.21
Without a dramatic reduction in the pollution causing
climate change, the United States could experience twice as
many days with a heat index greater than 100 °F between
the years 2036 and 2065 than in the period from 1971 to
2000.22 For context, the National Weather Service typically
issues heat advisories when the forecast calls for two
or more consecutive days with a heat index of 100 °F or
more.23
Heat is a serious occupational health threat, particularly
for workers engaged in strenuous physical labor.24 As both
average temperatures and the number of heat waves climb,
more and more workers in the United States will face costly
and life-threatening heat-related illnesses.
Heat strain over multiple days can have a cumulative effect
on workers.30 Multiple days of excessive heat exposure
can reduce the effectiveness of the human body’s natural
cooling mechanisms, particularly in older workers, leading
to longer-lasting impairments.31
Even small changes in temperature can significantly affect
the health of workers, especially when doing physical labor.
Exertional heat illness, which is associated with increased
production of internal body heat due to strenuous activity,
can happen under cooler conditions than those that trigger
classic heat illness.32 After the 2010 Deepwater Horizon
disaster in the Gulf of Mexico, the risk of heat illness in
people engaged in cleanup activities was 1.4 times higher
for every 1.8 °F increase over a wet globe bulb temperature
(heat stress in direct sunlight) of 68 °F.33
Heat exposure may also increase the vulnerability
of roofers, farmworkers, firefighters, and others to
toxic chemicals.34 There is some evidence that high
temperatures accelerate the movement of chemicals such
as polychlorinated biphenyls (PCBs) in the air and increase
chemical uptake by human lungs and skin.35 Workers also
may not want to wear personal protective gear during
extreme heat, increasing their likelihood of exposure in the
first place.36
From 1992 to 2016, heat killed more than 780 workers in
the United States and sickened or injured nearly 70,000
others.37 These are conservative estimates, because
employers and medical examiners don’t always indicate
when heat is a contributing factor to an injury, illness, or
death.38 Employers with ten or fewer employees are legally
exempt from reporting workplace illnesses and injuries
of any kind.39 Furthermore, workers may choose not to
report mild to moderate symptoms because of workplace
culture or a fear of retribution.40 For instance, fear of
discrimination or deportation dissuade some immigrant
workers from reporting unsafe conditions or injuries and
illnesses sustained on the job.41
Finally, heat can indirectly harm health by reducing takehome pay, making it harder to afford medical care, food,
and housing.42 Heat can reduce productivity, which is a
problem for piece-rate employees, whose total income
depends on the number of units of work they complete, or it
can stop work entirely.43 In the United States, extreme heat
led to the cumulative loss of nearly 1.1 billion work hours
among agricultural, manufacturing, and service sector
employees between 2000 and 2018.44 If high emissions
of climate-changing pollution continue, workers in the
contiguous United States could lose nearly 883 million
hours of work to heat in 2050 alone (Figure 1). The largest
losses would be felt in the Midwest and Southeast.45 For
context, 883 million lost hours is the rough equivalent of
423,000 full-time workers sitting idle for a year.46

From 1992 to 2016, heat killed more than 780 workers in the United States
and sickened or injured nearly 70,000 others.


Heat can also lead to extended absences from work, which
hurts those who don’t have paid sick leave. In 2018 fewer
than half of farm and construction workers—the two
groups most vulnerable to heat-related deaths—had paid
sick leave, compared with 80 to 90 percent of workers in
finance, insurance, real estate, and public administration.48
From 2013 to 2018, private sector workers in the United
States experienced an estimated 1,020 occupational cases
of nonfatal heat stroke that required time away from
work.49 About three-quarters of the cases resulted in one
to five days of time away. The worst 10 percent of cases,
however, resulted in lost-work time of a month or longer.50
Farm and Construction Workers
Workers in construction and agriculture will be hurt first,
and hurt most, by a continued rise in extreme heat days.
Both construction and farm work involve heavy physical
labor (often in the sun), protective clothing that can trap
body heat, and heavy equipment that generates external
heat.51 It’s not surprising that in the United States, workers
employed in construction, farming, and related industries
consistently have the highest rates of occupational heat
deaths, as shown in Table 1.52
Nonfatal heat illnesses are also common in these
industries. In 2017 nearly half of 202 child farmworkers
studied in North Carolina reported heat-related symptoms
such as vomiting, confusion, and fainting in the previous
year.53 (Note that the agriculture industry is exempt from
federal age and wage minimums and overtime limits for
child labor.54) As for construction, we already know that
over the past two decades, increases in average summer
temperatures across the United States were statistically
associated with increases in the number and rate of heatrelated deaths among construction workers.55
The health impacts of heat on farm and construction
workers will disproportionately affect immigrant workers
from Mexico and Central and South America.56 Immigrant
workers may have inadequate housing and a lack of
access to nutritious food or health insurance, are often
poorly trained in health and safety procedures, and can
be unaware of their workplace rights or ineligible for
workers’ compensation.57 Workplace discrimination and
deportation fears also dissuade some immigrant workers
from reporting unsafe conditions or injuries and illnesses
sustained on the job.58 In 2016, 75 percent of hired crop
workers in the United States and about 20 percent of
construction workers were born in Mexico or Central or
South America.59 Nearly half of all hired crop workers were
undocumented.60 As a result of these factors, from 2000 to
2010, Latinos were more than three times likelier than nonLatinos to die on the job from heat exposure.61

Utility and Communications Workers
Electric utility and communications workers, who deal with
many of the same risk factors as farm and construction
workers, face the additional pressure of getting their work
done on deadline or in the wake of emergencies.63 This
means workers may be exposed to heat over unusually long
stretches and be unable to take rest breaks in the shade.
As the climate crisis deepens, utility and communications
workers will face hotter conditions and more service calls
as demand for electrical power increases (for cooling
purposes) and more severe storms and wildfires damage
infrastructure.64
Military Personnel
Members of the military are also seriously threatened by
heat given the physical and outdoor nature of their work,
the hot climates of many U.S. military installations at
home and abroad, the need to carry heavy gear and wear
protective body armor, and the drive to “train like you
fight.”65 In just a five-year period (2014 to 2018), there were
11,452 cases of heat-related illnesses among active duty
members of the Armed Forces.66 The rate of heatstroke
among active duty members increased by 73 percent during
that time, and the rate of heat exhaustion increased by
nearly 53 percent.67
The increase in heat stress among active duty members
also contributed to a 40 percent increase in the rate of
rhabdomyolysis from 2014 to 2018.68 Rhabdo, as it’s often
called, which can strike anyone engaged in strenuous
activity in extreme heat, causes muscle tissue to break
down and can lead to kidney failure or death.69
According to an analysis by the Union of Concerned
Scientists, military installations in the United States could
see nearly five times more days with a heat index above 100
°F from 2036 to 2065 than they did from 1971 to 2000.70
Indoor Workers
Most indoor workers engaged in sedentary or light work
find a temperature range of 71.6 to 77.9 °F comfortable.71
The comfortable range is lower under humid conditions
and for workers engaged in more physically intense work
(Spotlight 3).72 Insufficient ventilation or air-conditioning
can cause discomfort for many indoor workers, including
janitors and flight attendants.73 As summer travelers well
know, small airplanes can heat up quickly while they’re
sitting on the tarmac. In response to reports about heat
extremes causing flight attendants to pass out, vomit,
or suffer other health consequences, the Association of
Flight Attendants–CWA launched the 2Hot2Cold app to
track temperature extremes.74 From August 2018 through
October 2019, flight crews reported more than 2,800
incidents of extreme temperatures in airplane cabins
to the union’s app.75 About 51 percent of the reported
temperatures were between 80 and 89 °F, and nearly
31 percent were 90 °F or more.76
Other indoor workers lack any air-conditioning at all,
whether due to outdated infrastructure or unforeseen
disruptions. In 2017 and 2018, Hurricane Maria caused
the largest electricity blackout in U.S. history and secondlargest blackout in the world. For months afterward, many
workers in Puerto Rico toiled in hot indoor environments
with no air-conditioning (Spotlight 4).77 In a summer 2018
survey, 68 percent of public sector workers from 10 Puerto
Rican workplaces reported working in extreme heat.78
SPOTLIGHT 3: PAM RALL-JOHNSTON, JANITOR
ASSISTANT DISTRICT LEADER OF WESTERN PA
ELECT, 32BJ SEIU, PITTSBURGH
“I was born and raised in Pittsburgh, and
I’ve seen the effects of the climate crisis
for our city over the past five decades.
Growing up, the climate was very different.
We never had air-conditioning; now you can’t
survive without it. There used to be distinct
seasons of summer, fall, winter, and spring.
Now it goes from cold weather right into
extreme heat.
“The rivers used to support farmers outside of the city. Now they
flood farmland and city streets, causing sinkholes and mud slides.
People have gotten stuck in their cars and drowned right here in
the city. The water comes down the hills so fast it backs up the
sewage pipes, which are very old and not equipped to handle that
much rain in such a short period of time.
“The bugs weren’t so bad growing up. Now we’re being invaded by
all sorts of strange bugs I’ve never seen before. There are more
ticks that spread Lyme disease and mosquitoes that lay eggs in all
the standing water and transmit West Nile.
“The crazy weather is affecting us on the job too. I’ve been a
janitor for 27 years, and I work the night shift from 11 p.m. to 7 a.m.
Some of the buildings we work in are more than 100 years old, and
they turn the air-conditioning off at night. It often gets over 90 °F
and extremely humid in the buildings, and it’s tough to do physical
labor in those conditions. Sometimes it’s so humid we can’t wax
the floors because they won’t dry after we clean them.
“Our union supports solutions to the climate crisis because
working-class people are hit the hardest. A lot of workers don’t
have health insurance, so they can’t deal with the impacts of
increased heat and smog, like asthma. If America’s workers don’t
take on this fight, who will? Certainly not the executives who are
selling the fossil fuels and putting money in their pockets.
“It’s important to make sure that working people have access to
good jobs as we transition to clean energy. Here in Pittsburgh,
 we used to have a lot of coal jobs, mines and steel mills. We
need to reach out to those families who are angry about losing
their fossil fuel jobs and work with the city, county, state, and
federal government to create opportunities for job training and
placement. We must bring everyone along and make sure nobody’s
left behind.”

SPOTLIGHT 4: MARICELI GONZÁLEZ, ASSISTANT CHIEF OF STAFF, SINDICATO PUERTORRIQUEÑO DE
TRABAJADORES, SEIU LOCAL 1996, SAN JUAN, PUERTO RICO
“Due to the higher temperature of the oceans, we’re getting hurricanes that are much stronger and bigger in Puerto
Rico. In 2017 we had two level five hurricanes back to back, first Irma and then a couple weeks later Maria. Maria
caused so much damage to our communities that we now refer to Puerto Rico ‘before Maria’ and ‘after Maria.’
“During that hurricane, I was at home with my husband and five-year-old son. The storm ripped the wood covering
off our balcony and our door was swinging wildly back and forth, so we had to move our furniture to barricade
the doorway. When we emerged, everyone was in shock because it looked like an atomic bomb had hit us. All the
trees were stripped of their leaves and looked burned. We walked past one school where the basketball court was
covered with dead fish from the river flooding.
“Some areas went almost a year without electricity, months without clean water or cell phone signals, and weeks without access to ATM
machines. The roads were all blocked with mud, and people’s roofs had been torn completely off. People couldn’t work because there was no
way to get to their jobs. The local government wasn’t prepared for that level of total devastation.
“Now two years later [in 2019], many roads still haven’t been fixed, some people still have the blue FEMA tarps covering their homes, and
hurricane season is starting again. The response we received from the federal government wasn’t fair—they treated us like we’re second-class
citizens.
“I will say that Hurricane Maria brought out the best in fellow union members and our communities. We cooked for each other and helped our
neighbors. We need that kind of cooperation throughout the country to solve the climate crisis before it gets worse.”
SPOTLIGHT 5: ORLANDO GREEN, SCHOOL BUS OWNER/OPERATOR, ST. TAMMANY FEDERATION OF
TEACHERS AND EMPLOYEES, AFT, SLIDELL, LOUISIANA
“I always try to go above and beyond in my job as a school bus operator. I treat my bus as a rolling classroom, an opportunity to teach kids
character, courtesy, politeness, and empathy for one another. Sometimes kids are going through tough times, like their parents’ divorces or
deaths, and the school bus needs to be a welcoming, nurturing environment. It’s also important to recognize, address, and report any bullying.
“But the increasing heat in Louisiana has made my job a lot harder because it makes the kids agitated. Starting in the spring, temperatures
begin rising into the 80s, and there is no air-conditioning on the bus. Even with all the windows down and the top hatches open, the heat can
become unbearable.
“During the humid summers, with all 40 kids crowded inside, the heat index can reach around 105 degrees in the bus. Their little faces become
flushed red, and they start yelling, ‘Mr. Green, it’s too hot in here!’ One child has diabetes and his mother has told me the extreme heat can be
really dangerous for him. I don’t think it’s conducive to the children’s health, good behavior, or learning.
“I was born in New Orleans and have lived in Slidell, northeast of the city, for three decades. During my lifetime I’ve seen the heat get way out
of normal range, along with the severity of storms and flooding. On the eastern side of Slidell is the Pearl River, and in recent years it has been
flooding a lot due to snowmelt from up north, and excessive rain. The flooding has been so bad in some subdivisions that it’s prevented me
from picking up kids at their homes. Our drainage system is just based on gravity, without much mechanical pumping, so we’re at the mercy of
Mother Nature.
“Growing up, most of the storms would be called ‘tropical depressions’ and you could ride them out. But nowadays it seems like we’re getting
100-year storms with violent winds and flooding almost every season. I learned my lesson starting with Hurricane Katrina to always evacuate
when big storms are coming in. We keep close track of the ‘cone of uncertainty,’ and if it looks like Slidell is going to get hit, the Green family is
getting out of Dodge.
“During Katrina, my wife, daughter, and I battened down the hatches, loaded up the truck, and went to stay with my son in Texas. When we
returned, 17 trees on our property were snapped in half or uprooted. Other families were hit a lot worse, with their entire properties flooded and
destroyed. It’s been a burden on our neighbors and all working people in this area to pay for the considerably higher premiums for our flood
insurance.
“Increased heat, rain, and flooding are also hurting our local economy. When the Mississippi River swells too much, they open up the spillway
and dump water into Lake Pontchartrain. That lake has supplied the fishing industry with abundant seafood, including crabs, shrimp, and
oysters, for as long as I can remember.
“But the Mississippi carries all sorts of fertilizers from upriver, which combined with excessive heat have caused massive blooms of toxic green
algae in the lake. The algae create dead zones where no life can survive.
“I hope that elected officials and candidates at every level start supporting solutions to this emergency, so we can get a handle on the
increasingly dangerous conditions we’re experiencing.”

Educators in many U.S. school districts also regularly
work in unhealthy heat, especially at the start and end
of the school year (Spotlight 5). According to the U.S.
Energy Information Administration, only 63 percent of
U.S. educational buildings (including grade school, middle
school, high school, postsecondary, and other instructional
buildings) were fully air-conditioned in 2012.79 About 11
percent of educational buildings had cooling for no more
than 50 percent of their floor space, and 7 percent had
no cooling at all.80 A 2017 investigation by the nonprofit
news outlet The 74 found that most schools in some of the
nation’s largest school districts—including Milwaukee,
Denver, and Detroit—are not fully air-conditioned.81
Teachers across the country have reported buying
window units with their own money or trying to solicit
contributions from private donors.82 In October 2019,
Columbus City Schools in Ohio closed for two days due to
extreme heat and humidity, because just one-third of the
buildings had air-conditioning.83 However, even under those
conditions essential employees, including bus drivers, were
still expected to report to work.84
Even in schools that have air-conditioning, the cooling
system may not work very well. For instance, school
staff made more than 1,000 requests to the Los Angeles
Unified School District in the summer of 2019 for repairs
to air-conditioning.85 That same summer, teachers at two
schools in San Antonio, Texas, reported symptoms of heat
illness after the central air-conditioning broke down.86
In 2017 the American Society of Civil Engineers rated
the windows, plumbing, and HVAC systems of more than
30 percent of schools nationwide as being in fair or poor
condition.87 By one estimate, the nation should be spending
$145 billion per year to get schools up to modern, safe, and
healthy standards—$46 billion more than historical annual
spending.88
Finally, teachers in some school districts are at higher risk
of heat-related illnesses because they don’t have adequate
access to and use of restroom facilities and therefore may
intentionally avoid drinking water. In 2015, 45 percent
of more than 30,000 teachers surveyed across the nation
by the American Federation of Teachers reported getting
inadequate bathroom breaks.89 In 2019, 63 percent of
teachers surveyed in Florida’s Orange County Public School
District said they avoided drinking water to limit their trips
to the bathroom.90 Dehydration compromises the human
body’s natural cooling mechanisms (including sweating)
and can lead to kidney damage.91
FLOODS AND HURRICANES SWAMP WORKERS
WITH HEALTH PROBLEMS
Severe floods and hurricanes damage infrastructure,
spread toxins and infectious diseases, encourage mold
growth, and disrupt essential services, creating unhealthy
conditions for community members and workers alike.92
Climate change is fueling an increase in the number and
intensity of heavy precipitation events in the United
States.93 Since 1958 every region of the country except
Hawaii and the U.S. Caribbean has experienced at least
a 9 percent increase in the total amount of extreme
precipitation.94 The largest increases have been in the
Midwest (42 percent) and the Northeast (55 percent).95
More extreme rainfall, in turn, increases the risk of more
severe flooding.96 Multiple studies have shown that climate
change increased the intensity of the rainfall and flooding
in Louisiana during a summer storm in 2016 and from
Hurricane Harvey in Texas in 2017.97 In the mid-Atlantic
region, climate change may have more than doubled the
likelihood of the extreme rainfall that contributed to
months of serious flooding in 2018.98
Heavy precipitation events and floods will continue to
worsen as pollution from fossil fuels warms the climate.99
With an additional 3.6 °F of average global warming, the
intensity of 500-year rainstorms (those that historically
had a 0.2 percent chance of happening in a given year)
could increase 10 to 50 percent across the contiguous
United States.100 That same amount of warming could also
more than double the expected annual damages from 500-
year river floods in the Midwest, Northeast, and northern
and southern Great Plains.101
The average global sea level has gone up by 7 to 8 inches
since 1900, and coastal flooding is getting worse as this
rise continues.102 In the United States since the year 2000,
rising seas have dramatically increased the number of high
tide floods (i.e., floods that aren’t associated with a storm),
which make roads and parking lots inaccessible and damage
businesses.103 In 2018, 12 U.S. locations broke or tied their
record for the number of days with high tide flooding,
including Apalachicola, Florida (10 days); Wilmington,
North Carolina (14 days); and Washington, D.C. (22 days).104
Under continued high levels of climate-changing emissions,
the national median number of high tide flood days could
increase from 5 in 2018 to as many as 75 in 2050.105
In addition to more frequent and severe high tide floods,
sea level rise increases the destructive potential of coastal
storms by increasing the height of storm surges.106 (Storm
surge, which is a wall of water pushed onshore by strong
winds, is responsible for roughly half of the death toll of
hurricanes.107) What’s more, warming ocean temperatures
associated with climate change are expected to increase the
intensity of hurricanes. Together these factors will make
hurricanes more deadly and dangerous than ever.108 The
current consensus is that 3.6 °F of climate warming will
increase hurricane wind speeds by a global median of 5
percent and will increase the global proportion of category
4 to 5 hurricanes by 13 percent.109

Physical Health Threats
Floods and hurricanes create a multitude of hazards that
threaten the health and life of workers directly engaged in
disaster response and recovery.110
From 1992 to 2006, an estimated 72 occupational deaths in
the United States were associated with hurricanes.111 About
40 percent of those involved recovery workers engaged
in activities such as storm cleanup and reconstruction.112
The inherent dangers of post-storm work—such as downed
power lines, falling tree limbs, and falls from ladders and
roofs—can be exacerbated by 12- to 18-hour workdays,
inadequate health and safety training, a lack of housing,
and insufficient access to, or time for, proper meals.113 For
example, one worker engaged in recovery after Hurricane
Michael (2018) required medical assistance after fainting
from hunger while on a ladder.114
Non-hurricane floods caused at least 62 occupational
deaths in the United States from 1992 to 2006; 45 percent
were vehicle related.115 More than three-quarters of the
workers drowned, often while in a motor vehicle, and
nearly a quarter of the deaths were among employees in
the transportation and materials-moving industry (e.g.,
delivery truck drivers).116
Floodwaters can also displace, injure, or trap wildlife,
domestic animals, and pests, putting disaster workers
at risk of stings, bites, or other injuries. In the wake of
Hurricane Harvey (2017), for example, the Montgomery
County Fire and Rescue Service in Texas warned that
first responders were facing “flotillas of fire ants.”117 Fire
ants will aggressively attack people when disturbed, and
their venomous stings can lead to skin infections or severe
allergic reactions.118 After Hurricanes Katrina and Rita
in 2005, close to half of 2,834 Coast Guard responders
surveyed reported bites, scratches, or other injuries
from insects or other animals.119 (The threat of tick- and
mosquito-borne illnesses to workers is discussed in a later
section.)
After floodwaters have receded, cleanup and
reconstruction crews can be exposed to mold, dust, and
other lung irritants.120 For example, more than a quarter of
day laborers who had been engaged in demolition, cleanup,
and reconstruction efforts in 2017 after Hurricane Harvey
reported difficulty breathing, more than a third reported
headaches, and two-fifths said they had watery eyes or eye
infections.121 Only 15 percent of the workers said they had
been trained on the health risks of mold, and fewer than 40
percent had been given respirators while on the job.122
Water or wind damage to industrial facilities, nuclear
power plants, and even hospitals can expose workers to
hazardous chemicals and nuclear radiation.123 In 2017
Hurricane Harvey severely flooded the Arkema Chemical
plant in Crosby, Texas.124 The 12-person “ride-out crew”
at the plant during the storm put their own lives at risk to
keep organic peroxide containers cool so they wouldn’t
ignite—including by manually moving more than 2,100
potentially flammable containers through chest-high
water to back-up refrigeration.125 Despite their efforts,
the peroxide eventually exploded when the back-up
refrigeration failed, releasing toxic smoke and fumes
that affected at least 21 emergency responders. The longterm health effects of this peroxide exposure remains to
be seen.126
Nurses and other health workers commonly endure long
shifts, insufficient or unsafe food and water supplies, and
inadequate bathroom facilities in the wake of major storms
and floods.127 Insufficient supplies and safe shelter in the
wider community may even increase exposure to workplace
violence.128 Some Houston-area hospitals experienced
“eruptions of domestic violence” among people who were
using the hospitals as shelters from Hurricane Harvey, as
well as break-ins by people looking for drugs.129
Mental Health Threats
Storms and floods also put workers under considerable
mental stress, particularly when they face the double
whammy of challenging work conditions and harm to loved
ones and personal property (Spotlight 6).130
Multiple studies have found that firefighters, police officers,
military personnel, and health care professionals engaged
in disaster response have an elevated risk of unhealthy
coping behaviors, such as problem drinking, and mental
health challenges like depression and suicidality.131 The
mental health risks of disasters can be further heightened
among responders who have pre-existing mental illness,
work in the most severely affected areas, have multiple or
ambiguous job roles, face barriers to getting mental health
care, or don’t get enough sleep.132
The mental health consequences of disaster response can
last for years. In June 2006, 5 percent of nearly 1,500
public health workers exposed to the severe 2004 and
2005 hurricane seasons in Florida met the criteria for
post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).133 More than 8
percent reported 14 or more mentally unhealthy days in the
previous month.134 In surveys done 10 to 12 months after
Hurricane Maria, 23 percent of nearly 800 healthcare and
social service workers in Puerto Rico reported moderateto-severe anxiety, and nearly half met the clinical criteria
for PTSD.135
There is emerging evidence that journalists and school
staff also may be prone to mental health problems after
severe storms. During a disaster such as a hurricane,
journalists can be repeatedly exposed to devastating scenes
and have disturbing encounters with disaster survivors.136
Two months after Hurricane Harvey hit Texas in 2017,
for example, 20 percent of 30 television and newspaper
journalists surveyed met the criteria for PTSD and 40
percent met the criteria for clinical depression.137 In
severely affected school districts, teachers and other
school staff may struggle to cope with the emotional
burden of providing mental health support to children.138
Unfortunately, there is a dearth of data on the psychological
well-being of journalists and school employees in the wake
of disasters, making it difficult to provide them with the
care they need.139
SPOTLIGHT 6: JANET FONSECA, HEALTH CARE WORKER, SEIU TEXAS, CORP
“My area of Texas is getting hotter every year, and the storms are becoming more violent. When Hurricane Harvey hit in 2017, my 82-year-old
great-aunt was living with me at the time. The storm was so powerful, it knocked trees over onto electrical lines, causing the power to go out in
the area for a week.
 “The heat was incredibly intense and my great-aunt, who was diabetic, started to pant and go through heat exhaustion. My husband and I had
to go on a scavenger hunt to find generators, gas, and power to get the air conditioner running in her room. We were afraid her health could be
at risk, and we needed to keep her insulin refrigerated.
 “When the utility company tried to turn the electricity back on, the downed power lines would set trees and bushes on fire, so they’d have
to shut it off again. My coworkers and my husband’s cousins came out to help clear debris off the lines because the company and local
government were overwhelmed.
 “One of my neighbors across the street was an older gentleman and a veteran, and his wife was on hospice, in the process of dying. A tree had
fallen on their home and smashed through the roof, and they had no power. We tried to help and support them as best we could. I felt terrible for
them.
“Everything was shut down, including hospitals, gas stations, and grocery stores. The hospital where I work was closed to new admissions
for three to five days because of wind-driven rain and roof damage. For the patients who were already in my hospital when the storm hit, we
couldn’t discharge some of them because their homes had been destroyed. Some were confused and traumatized; they just couldn’t wrap their
minds around the fact that they didn’t have homes to go back to. It was like they were suddenly homeless.”
The mental health consequences of disaster response can last for years.

In 2012 temporary work interruptions associated with Hurricane Sandy resulted in
$7 billion in lost income over just four days from Florida to New Hampshire.
Wage and Job Losses
As discussed above in the section about extreme heat,
losses in income can make it harder for workers to pay
for housing, utilities, food, and medical care.140 This is
particularly true for the low-wage workers who make up
44 percent of the U.S. workforce aged 18 to 64 and are least
likely to have pay-protection benefits such as paid sick
leave.141 Losses in income or meaningful employment also
can harm mental well-being and increase the frequency
and severity of mental disorders such as depression and
substance abuse.142
Floods and Hurricanes
Recent floods and hurricanes in the United States have
led to significant losses of income, especially for hourly
workers without paid time off (Spotlight 7).
In 2012 temporary work interruptions associated with
Hurricane Sandy resulted in $7 billion in lost income
over just four days from Florida to New Hampshire.143 In
New York City, flooding from the hurricane and months
of subsequent repairs created significant commuting
delays for employed New Yorkers and made it harder for
unemployed people who depend on the subway system to
look for new work.144 For example, the R Train in Brooklyn
was closed for repairs for two months in 2012 and another
month in 2013. Average annual unemployment in Brooklyn
neighborhoods with high dependence on the R Train
increased 0.4 percent between those two years even as it
decreased 1.4 percent in other, nearby neighborhoods.145
The increase in unemployment was about three times
higher for individuals without access to a vehicle than for
those with one, and nearly two to five times higher among
Asians, Blacks, and Hispanics than among whites.146
In spring and summer 2019, historic flooding in the
Midwest prevented a record-high number of farmers from
planting crops such as corn.147 Although much of the lost
income for farmers will eventually be recovered through
crop insurance, the wait for insurance checks combined
with international trade disputes and other factors
increased U.S. farm bankruptcies by 24 percent from 2018
to 2019.148
In September 2019, workers in areas of the southeastern
United States affected by Hurricane Dorian reported
concerns about paying their bills due to business closures
before and after the storm.149 A few weeks later, a third
of 3,300 Texas residents surveyed in the wake of Tropical
Storm Imelda reported wage losses associated with the
storm.150
There is also the issue of wage theft, a common problem
for immigrant workers after major storms.151 For instance,
more than a quarter of 361 day laborers reported incidents
of employers not paying them for work in the first month
of recovery after Hurricane Harvey.152 Employers stole an
average of $212 per incident.153 As a recent commentary in
the American Journal of Public Health put it, “The chaos of
the disaster recovery worksite, weak oversight by federal
and state regulators, and fly-by-night contractors combine
with immigrants’ own vulnerabilities to create maximally
exploitative conditions for this workforce.”154
Sea Level Rise
Sea level rise is already making it harder for people to
travel to work in coastal U.S. cities. In 2015, for example,
43 percent of about 2,000 Portsmouth, Virginia, residents
reported in surveys that recurrent flooding had kept at
least one household member from getting in or out of
their neighborhood.155 Residents dependent on public
transportation were particularly concerned about their
ability to get to work when roads flooded.156
In coastal New Jersey, an additional two feet of sea level
rise could reduce the accessibility of jobs by nearly 45
percent in the town of Cape May, nearly 64 percent in
Atlantic City, and more than 88 percent in Wildwood.157
The average loss of accessibility would be 5.6 times higher
for the lowest-income workers than for the highest-income
workers.158 According to one estimate, there is about a 50
percent chance that New Jersey will experience 1.9 to 2.5
feet of sea level rise by 2070.159
Disruptions to infrastructure also affect local economic
activity. In 2017, for example, recurrent flooding in a major
parking lot in downtown Annapolis, Maryland, reduced the
income of 16 businesses that year by somewhere between
$86,000 and $172,000.160
WILDFIRES POSE MYRIAD HEALTH THREATS
The relationships among wildfire, climate, and how people
prevent and manage fire is complicated and highly location
dependent.161 In general, however, rising temperatures and
changes in precipitation are drying out soils and vegetation
and, in some areas, boosting the growth of grasses that act
as kindling.162
As a result, wildfire seasons are getting longer and more
severe. From 1985 to 2016, the total area burned annually
by wildfires in the United States increased fourfold.163 And
communities in wildfire-prone areas are growing rapidly,
putting more people in harm’s way. In the contiguous
United States, the number of homes in areas with a medium
to very high likelihood of wildfire increased by an estimated
6.1 million (more than 1,000 percent) from 1940 to 2010.164
Increases in wildfires will put more emergency responders
and recovery workers in dangerous situations and expose
more outdoor and indoor workers to unhealthy wildfire
smoke. 

SPOTLIGHT 7: GINA WILLIAMS, GARMENT SEWER, WORKERS UNITED SOUTHERN REGION, SEIU,
SAMPSON COUNTY, NORTH CAROLINA
“When Hurricane Florence hit North Carolina [in 2018], it flooded our roads and washed some of them completely away. I’ve been a lieutenant in
my local volunteer fire department for a decade, and my husband, son, and daughter are also volunteers. The storm damaged our home’s floor
and roof, but we had to get out into our community because some of our neighbors were impacted much worse.
“Many people’s homes were completely destroyed, and others had no food, water, or power for up to a month. We rescued them from their
houses, fed them, and invited them to take showers at the fire department. We cleared fallen trees from roads and properties day after day.
“I work in a garment factory, and some of my coworkers had to miss three weeks of work because the roads were unusable, which was a
financial burden on top of the losses we’d all experienced. I’m strongly dedicated to supporting my community in times of need, but I worry that
we just won’t have the capacity to help everyone as these storms get worse and worse.”

C
Deaths and Injuries Among Wildland Firefighters
Wildland firefighting is an inherently dangerous job.165
It typically requires strenuous work over 12 to 16 hours
a day for up to 14 consecutive days.166 During that time,
workers wear heavy protective gear that can restrict their
movement and increase the risk of heat illness.167
From 2009 to 2018, 144 wildland firefighters in the United
States died from on-duty illnesses or injuries.168 Common
causes of death among wildland firefighters are direct
exposure to flames, vehicle and aircraft accidents, and
illnesses such as heatstroke and heart attacks.169
From 2003 to 2007, wildland firefighters in the United
States experienced an estimated 1,301 nonfatal injuries
on the job.170 Slips, trips, and falls made up 28 percent
of the injuries, possibly due to uneven or steep terrain;
22 percent of injuries were related to equipment, tools,
and machinery.171Late-season injuries had twice the odds
of being severe than those during early or peak season,
potentially because of fatigue.172 (The study authors defined
a severe injury as one that “requires days away from work,
days of restricted work, or job transfer.”173) As wildfires
increase, wildland firefighters will spend more time on the
job, risking injury or death in each fire season.
Health Threats of Wildfire Smoke
Wildfire smoke contains hundreds of chemicals and
components that are hazardous to human health, such as
formaldehyde, heavy metals, and tiny particles (particulate
matter).174The exact composition of wildfire smoke is
determined by factors such as the temperature of the fire,
the materials that are burning, and the weather.175
Particulate matter is the primary—and best understood—
health threat from exposure to wildfire smoke.176When
small particles travel deep into the lungs and enter the
bloodstream, they can exacerbate or cause a wide range of
health effects, including asthma, heart attacks, lung cancer,
and premature death.177
A 2019 study of firefighters across the United States
found that long-term exposure to particulate matter in
wildfire smoke significantly increased the risk of dying
from lung cancer and cardiovascular disease.178 Wildland
firefighters who worked longer seasons and for more years
had a higher risk of deadly illness. For example, the risk
of lung cancer was more than 65 percent greater among
long-season workers (98 days per year) than among shortseason workers (49 days per year). Firefighters with 25
years of experience had roughly double the risk of lung
cancer relative to those with 10 years of experience.179 As
fire seasons continue to lengthen under climate change,
wildland firefighters will face increasing threats to their
lung health.
Polycyclic aromatic hydrocarbons, a carcinogen found in
wildfire smoke, may elevate the risk of lung, bladder, and
skin cancers; immunological disorders; and some forms
of heart disease in wildland firefighters.180 Studies in
California suggest that exposures to polycyclic aromatic
hydrocarbons can happen both on the fire line and off it,
while firefighters are at nearby command posts.181
Finally, there is carbon monoxide, a colorless, odorless gas
generated both by wildfires themselves and by the dieselor gas-powered machines commonly used during wildfire
cleanup and recovery.182 In high enough concentrations,
carbon monoxide reduces the amount of oxygen delivered
to the body’s organs and tissues.183 It can cause a range of
symptoms, from headache, weakness, and confusion to
coma and death, and is particularly problematic for people
who have cardiovascular disease.184 Wildland firefighters
are most vulnerable to carbon monoxide exposure during
the “mop up” stage, when materials are smoldering and
firefighters are putting out lingering small fires.185
Most of what is known about the occupational health
harms of wildfire smoke comes from studies of firefighters,
who have the highest levels of exposures to smoke over
the longest periods of time. However, wildfire smoke can
cause significant health effects hundreds of miles from
the flames.186 This means that outdoor workers such as
farmworkers, telephone line technicians (Spotlight 8),
and construction workers can also be at risk.187 Indoor
workers may likewise be exposed to smoke if their building
HVAC systems don’t provide enough filtration or are
otherwise working incorrectly.188 More research is needed
to understand the long-term health effects of wildfire
smoke exposure in workers, particularly among low-wage
populations who feel they have to work through dangerous
situations to make ends meet.189
From 2009 to 2018, 144 wildland firefighters in the United States
died from on-duty illnesses or injuries.

SPOTLIGHT 8: SHAWN HEAPE, TELEPHONE LINE TECHNICIAN, CWA LOCAL 9400, LAKE COUNTY, CALIFORNIA
“What people need to understand is that telephone line technicians are first responders too. When wildfires break out, we’re out there working
day and night to restore landline and cell phone service to customers while the fires are still burning. Residents, businesses, and government
agencies need their ability to communicate with each other in order to keep people safe, so our work can be a matter of life and death. We’re
dealing with heat exhaustion and also breathing in soot, ash, and toxic chemicals, which is one of my main concerns.
“I’ve been doing this work for 20 years and have been going to wildfires from the beginning. In recent years we’ve been having wildfires one
right after the other, which can stretch for hundreds of miles. During wildfire season, I work 16 hours a day, seven days a week for up to four
months straight.
“The fire department doesn’t care about putting out telephone poles and lines that are on fire because they have other priorities, so it’s up to
us. The poles and lines contain chemicals that can be highly toxic when burned. We’re breathing those chemicals in and getting covered in
dark ash. My coworkers and I get nosebleeds, and when we blow our noses black mucus comes out. Then we’re going home to our children
and spouses covered in all those poisonous chemicals. I’ve raised five kids while I’ve had this job, and one’s still at home. I’m afraid of what my
family and I have been exposed to over the years.
“We should have wash stations for clothes instead of having to bring our clothes back and clean them in our home washing machines. We also
need high-quality respirator masks that effectively filter the air and are easy to wear and breathe with in high temperatures. Companies and
governments need to start taking steps to protect those of us who are working in and around wildfires to keep communications services going.”

Mental Health Threats
As with storms and floods, the danger and destructiveness
of wildfires can harm the mental health of people engaged
in fire response and recovery. Potential outcomes for these
workers include depression, PTSD, and suicidality.190
Wildland firefighters may be at elevated risk of mental
health challenges due to repeated exposure to highly
stressful or traumatic situations, long workdays without
enough rest, extended time away from home, lack of social
support among colleagues, and workplace stigmas about
seeking mental health care.191 Suicidality appears to be a
growing problem among firefighters and other emergency
responders across the country, although official data on
deaths by suicide are lacking for wildland firefighters.192
In 2019 California lawmakers were concerned enough by
available data to pass a trio of bills intended to provide
more mental health support to first responders.193
After wildfires, some workers may become unofficial
mental health counselors for their colleagues and
community. Without appropriate training in self-care,
they may themselves experience emotional distress.194
For example, six months after the 2018 Camp Fire in
California, public school educators without mental health
training struggled to help affected students when the Butte
County Office of Education couldn’t fill all the requests it
got for trained mental health professionals.195 Beauty salon
workers likewise were exposed to repeated stories of loss
from their clients who had survived the Camp Fire, leading
a local community liaison from California State University
to wonder, “How can beauty industry professionals cope
with the trauma that they encounter every day?”196
Additional research is needed to better understand how
wildfires affect the mental health of workers, particularly
when those workers suffer serious personal losses during
the fires (Spotlight 9).
POTLIGHT 9: JOHN ALLEN, HOSPITAL COOK,
SEIU UNITED HEALTHCARE WORKERS WEST,
CHICO, CALIFORNIA
“[In 2018] I drove to work one morning
at 4 a.m. and it was just like any
other normal day. But when I got to
the hospital where I work, one of the
doctors said to me, ‘Don’t you know
there’s a fire where you live? The
entire town of Paradise is on fire.’
“My wife was recovering at home from
breast cancer surgery and was in no shape to drive. I raced to my
car and tried to drive back up the mountain to our house, but the
authorities had blocked the roads and turned me away. I called her
and said, ‘Just get out! Don’t grab anything, just leave now!’
“The fire moved so fast, people barely escaped with their lives,
and some didn’t escape at all. My wife’s mother was living in a
senior mobile home park and was partially deaf, so she didn’t hear
the evacuation announcement and died in the fire. A couple of my
coworkers and my wife’s sister lost their homes and everything
inside. The senior home where my wife worked was completely
destroyed, but fortunately the residents were evacuated.
“We loved living in Paradise, but now there’s no infrastructure and
nothing to go back to, so we’ve rented an apartment in Chico. For
weeks afterwards, you couldn’t go outside without a mask, even to
just get the mail. Ash was always falling from the sky so thick that
it covered cars and filled the beds of pickup trucks. Seven months
after the fire, FEMA contacted us and asked if we wanted to live in
a trailer but we said no thanks.
“We lost everything—birth certificates, our parents’ keepsakes,
bicycles for the grandkids, all our life’s photographs. That’s one of
the hardest parts: All we have left are memories and the pictures
on our phones.”

DROUGHT IS KICKING UP UNHEALTHY DUST
Outdoor workers in parts of the Southwest and Great
Plains face heightened health risks as rising temperatures
increase the frequency and severity of dust-producing
droughts.198 Droughts that are currently considered 100-
year events (i.e., those with a 1 percent chance of occurring
in any given year) could become more than 20 times as
frequent across most of the United States by the period
of 2070 to 2099, relative to the period of 1980 to 2009.199
In arid areas of the western United States, drier soils and
increased wildfire activity—which removes vegetation and
other natural soil stabilizers—will increase wind erosion
and cause more unhealthy dust to be released into the
air.200 By one estimate, warming and drying of the U.S.
Southwest could increase average annual concentrations
of fine dust by 57 percent in the period of 2080 to 2099,
relative to the period of 1986 to 2005.201
Respiratory Health Threats
Fine dust is a threat to lung health. Small dust particles
travel deep into the lungs and enter the bloodstream, where
they can cause or exacerbate conditions such as asthma and
bronchitis.202 Silica, a major component of desert dust, can
permanently scar lung tissue and cause lung cancer.203 Dust
also can carry pesticides and heavy metals as well as viral,
bacterial, and fungal pathogens.204
One such infectious disease is valley fever, a respiratory
illness caused by multiple species of Coccidioides fungi and
spread by contaminated dust.205 Arizona and California
typically account for more than 96 percent of U.S. valley
fever cases.206 About 40 percent of those infected get
flulike symptoms such as coughing, fever, and fatigue.207
In rare situations, the infection can spread outside the
lungs, causing meningitis and other severe conditions.208
For unknown reasons, African-Americans and people of
Filipino descent are more likely to develop serious valley
fever infections than are other racial and ethnic groups.209
From 1940 to 2015, more than half of all outbreaks of valley
fever worldwide were associated with workplace exposures
to Coccidioides.
210 Workers engaged in construction,
farming, or other activities that disturb soil are most likely
to be infected.211 For example, 574 active duty service
members of the U.S. military were diagnosed with valley
fever between 2007 and 2017.212
Valley fever can result in significant medical expenses
and time away from work. From October 2011 to 2014,
there were 44 cases of valley fever among workers at
two solar farm construction sites in California’s San Luis
Obispo County.213 Thirty-nine percent of the infected
workers visited the emergency room, and 20 percent were
hospitalized for a median of three days. More than 80
percent of the infected workers had to take time off work,
with two of them missing 18 or more months.214

Traffic Accidents
In 2018 work-related vehicle accidents caused 40 percent
of all work-related deaths in the United States.215 Blowing
dust can cause dangerous conditions in which drivers
are unable to see the road and other vehicles.216 For
instance, a dust storm in May 2019 near Hazelton, Idaho,
led to a multi-vehicle pileup that killed one person and
put two semi-truck drivers in the hospital.217 From 2006
to 2016 there were 204 wind-related vehicle accidents
in California’s San Bernardino, Riverside, and Imperial
Counties during dust events.218
The National Weather Service issues dust storm watches
and warnings to warn drivers of dangerous conditions.219
These advisories are most common in the region spanning
the southwestern Great Plains to the desert Southwest—
areas expected to become hotter and drier as the climate
changes.220 In one part of the southern Great Plains
covering southeast New Mexico, West Texas, southeast
Colorado, southwest Kansas, and the Oklahoma panhandle,
researchers found 620 areas with particularly high
concentrations of dust production from 2010 to 2016.221
These zones, most of which were close to highways,
produced even more dust after severe drought.222
TICKS AND MOSQUITOES THREATEN OUTDOOR
WORKERS
Climate change is helping some species of disease-carrying
ticks and mosquitoes move into new parts of the country,
stay active over more of the year, and produce more
offspring in a given season (Spotlight 10).223 These changes
in the distribution, seasonality, and abundance of pests
likely will increase the exposure of outdoor workers to
diseases such as West Nile virus, Zika virus, and Lyme
disease.224
Few studies have examined the occupational threats of
mosquito- and tick-borne illnesses.225 In general, however,
outdoor workers who spend time in wooded or brushy
areas, in flood zones, and on urban construction sites are
thought to have the greatest exposure.226 For instance, after
a Zika virus scare at a Miami Beach construction site in
2016, local mosquito-control authorities issued warnings
about the threat workers face from mosquito-borne
illnesses.


SPOTLIGHT 10: MICHELLE BOYLE, REGISTERED NURSE, SEIU HEALTHCARE PENNSYLVANIA, PITTSBURGH
“I’m a registered nurse at a hospital in Pittsburgh, and the climate crisis is affecting my family, my
neighbors, and my patients. We’re experiencing an onslaught of life-threatening heat, flooding, smog, and
Lyme disease.
“As average temperatures keep rising, the warmer winters mean ticks are thriving, spreading the diseases
they carry. My neighbor’s son was infected with Lyme disease three times by the time he was 12—and we
live in the city. I worry that as insect-borne diseases like Zika, West Nile, and chikungunya spread, we don’t
have enough tools in our arsenal to fight them.
“Hotter temperatures also increase ground-level ozone pollution which results in smog, and our city has
an F rating for air quality from the American Lung Association. My husband is a runner, and he developed
asthma after we moved here 17 years ago. Air pollution also leads to cardiovascular disease, heart attacks,
and strokes. I’m worried about the health of my two teenage daughters who’ve grown up breathing this air.
“The climate crisis is also generating higher precipitation. Pittsburgh, known for its three major rivers, has a higher chance of flooding in many
of our neighborhoods. This inflicts millions of dollars in damage to homes and businesses and makes it harder for emergency workers to reach
people who need medical care. Recently we were unable to transport certain patients because roads were closed due to flooding. How many
consecutive years can we have ‘100-year floods’ before they stop calling them that?
“Not only are ambulances being impeded, but I know flight nurses who haven’t been able to take off because it’s too hot and humid to fly, or
have been grounded due to increasingly intense storms. I work at a level one trauma center, and getting patients to the hospital as fast as
possible really is a matter of life and death.
“My family and I have been advocating for solutions to the climate crisis on a local level, but we need to address these multiple problems on a
grand scale. We need our hospitals to have proper staffing and emergency protocols in place to deal with climate-related disasters. We need
more funding invested in infectious disease research and treatment. We must vastly expand the renewable energy economy to clean up our air,
and make sure those new jobs are good, middle-class jobs where workers have a union voice.
“As a nurse for the past 25 years, when I look at all the interrelated problems created by the climate crisis, it’s terrifying. Science tells us this
is just the beginning of these types of issues. I try to remember the quote by Jonas Salk, who developed the polio vaccine here in Pittsburgh:
‘I have had dreams and I have had nightmares, but I have conquered my nightmares because of my dreams.’ I’m committed to conquering our
climate nightmare, because it’s the least I can do for my children.”

Members of the U.S. military are exposed to a wide array of
infectious diseases carried by mosquitoes and ticks.228 The
most common tick-borne illness among military personnel
is Lyme disease: From 2006 to 2012, there were more
than 1,300 new cases of Lyme disease among active duty
military forces at just 14 bases in the central and eastern
United States.229 Left untreated, Lyme disease can cause
severe headaches, muscle and joint pain, nerve pain, and
other debilitating symptoms.230 In recent years, at least two
cadets and two graduates of the U.S. Military Academy at
West Point were discharged from the Army because of latestage Lyme disease.231
Mosquito-borne illnesses of concern to the military include
St. Louis encephalitis, West Nile virus, dengue fever, and
Zika virus.232 From 2006 to 2015, there were 323 confirmed
cases of West Nile virus and 700 confirmed cases of dengue
fever among U.S. military personnel.233 Although most
people infected with West Nile and dengue suffer few to
no symptoms, these diseases can cause hospitalization or
death.234
Laboratory and modeling studies suggest that transmission
of Zika virus is highly temperature dependent—about 84 °F
seems to be optimal—and that rising global temperatures
could expand Zika’s geographic range and lengthen its
annual season.235 As of 2016, about 6 percent of the 733
military bases in the United States were suitable habitats
for both Zika virus and the mosquitoes that carry it.236
Typically, people infected with Zika virus don’t feel ill or
experience only mild, flulike symptoms.237 However, Zika
can cause miscarriages and a range of severe birth defects,
and it appears to be linked to a rare neurological condition
in children and adults called Guillain–Barré syndrome.238
DOCUMENTING CLIMATE DISRUPTION
IS A MENTAL HEALTH BURDEN
One emerging area of occupational health is the mental
well-being of scientists and other professionals engaged
in documenting, analyzing, and communicating the
scope of the climate crisis. Although there is virtually no
research on the topic, recent media reports indicate that
many climate and environmental science professionals
are under considerable mental stress.239 For example, a
2018 analysis of 43 letters written by climate scientists
for the storytelling project “Is This How You Feel?” found
38 mentions of seven positive emotional terms such as
“hopeful” and “grateful” but 60 mentions of nine negative
terms such as “frustrated” and “afraid.”240
A potential barrier to mental well-being among climate
scientists is the widespread idea that being emotional about
one’s science indicates “weakness, character deficiency, or,
worse, lack of scientific integrity and objectivity.”241 The
perceived need to be unemotional may pose a particular
challenge to scientists and communicators in the current
political context, when their alarms are unheeded or even
mocked.242
Anecdotally, at least, the mental health challenges of
working on climate change has driven some scientists and
communicators to switch careers.243 Given how important
scientists and communicators are to understanding and
solving the climate crisis, these departures give new
meaning to the International Workers of the World motto:
“An injury to one is an injury to all.”

Recommendations to Keep Workers Safe in a Hotter,
More Extreme World

Climate change is layering a daunting array of health and
safety threats onto the already challenging and complicated
landscape of workplace hazards. In some cases, the climate
crisis will exacerbate existing conditions such as extreme
heat. In others, it will create entirely new hazards, such
as the permanent inundation of long-standing businesses
or transportation corridors. Across the board, unchecked
climate change has the potential to harm individual
workers again and again—within their lifetimes, in the
space of a few years, or even during a single season
(Spotlight 11).245
Fortunately, many of the occupational harms of climate
change can be managed by adhering to four basic principles
of worker health and safety:
1. All workers have the right to a safe and healthy
workplace.
2. All occupational injuries and illnesses can be prevented
if workplace hazards are correctly identified and
eliminated or adequately controlled.
3. Occupational safety and health laws and regulations need
to be established, effectively communicated, periodically
updated, and rigorously enforced.
4. Collective action by workers and their representatives is
an essential element of workplace health and safety.
The recommendations that follow flow from these
principles and our research and reporting.
Across the board, unchecked climate change has
the potential to harm individual workers again
and again—within their lifetimes, in the space
of a few years, or even during a single season. 
SPOTLIGHT 11: JULIA KNOWLES, SERVICE REPRESENTATIVE, CWA LOCAL 3201, ALBANY, GEORGIA
“I’ve survived three natural disasters. In 1994 and ’98 we had ‘100-year floods’ that hit Georgia
twice in four years, and then Hurricane Michael struck in 2018. In 1994 my husband at the time
was on leave from the military, and we came home to Georgia with our two children to surprise our
families. He was staying at his parents’ home in East Albany and I was at my mother’s with the kids in
South Albany, so we were separated by the river. When the rain started, my mom called me from the
local hospital where she worked as a nurse and said to leave her home because a flood was coming.
When I went outside the water was already halfway up the car tires.
 “My mother lost her entire home in the flooding. My children and I had to go to a shelter and spent two weeks there. For three days my mom
was stuck at her hospital, and then the National Guard brought her to join us at the shelter. The floodwaters and damage kept my ex-husband
from getting to us.
The experience was financially devastating and also emotionally disturbing for our whole family. There was so much human suffering in the
shelter. Some people were disabled and didn’t have proper accommodations, and others had urgent medical needs that went unmet.
 “When Hurricane Michael hit, it was another extremely difficult experience. We went 12 days without power, and it was a real struggle because
I was living with and caring for my disabled mom, who’s now 76 years old. By the time Michael got to us, it was still a category two storm, but
our city’s infrastructure isn’t designed to handle that. In my lifetime we’d never had a hurricane in this area. We’re three hours north of the
Florida state line and far inland.
 “A hundred percent of the city lost power. Our water became contaminated with sewage and for weeks we had to boil it before we could drink
or bathe with it. Phone lines were down and cell phone towers were damaged, so our phones and internet weren’t working and we had no form
of communication. It was months before we got internet service back. My work was also shut down so we didn’t have any income coming in. We
went down to try get some help from the government so we could eat, and there must have been 1,000 people waiting in line for food stamps.
“Another way that climate change is affecting our community is the spread of insect-borne disease. It’s become so hot that the number of
mosquitoes has increased, because the winters aren’t cold enough to kill them off. There are more and more cases of West Nile each year. It’s
a vicious circle as the storms and flooding overwhelm our drainage and sewer system, and then the water just sits there, providing a breeding
ground for more mosquito eggs. The working class and poor neighborhoods are hit the hardest, where the infrastructure is the most in need of
repair.
 “I know people are experiencing this kind of violent, erratic weather all over the U.S. When I hear there are over 90-degree temperatures in
Alaska, it’s clear global warming is a real problem for our whole country. I hope our government starts to proactively deal with these issues
by upgrading our infrastructure, promoting electric cars and charging stations, and creating more storm preparedness before it’s too late.”

ALL WORKERS HAVE THE RIGHT TO A SAFE
AND HEALTHY WORKPLACE
n	 Congress should amend Section 3 of the
Occupational Safety and Health Act of 1970 (OSH
Act) to expand protections for public sector
workers. The OSH Act, which is administered by
the Occupational Safety and Health Administration
(OSHA), is intended “to assure safe and healthful
working conditions for working men and women.”246
Unfortunately, the OSH Act covers most private sector
and federal workers but doesn’t apply to state and local
government workers.247 State and local public sector
workers enjoy OSH Act protections only if they work
in one of 28 states or territories that have developed
an OSHA-approved state plan that must “operate at
least as effectively as OSHA” and “[meet] its mandated
responsibilities under the [OSH] Act.”248 (Those states
are shown in Figure 2.) Many of the remaining states
and territories (known as federal OSHA states and
territories) are the most vulnerable to climate-related
disasters, such as the Gulf Coast states and the island
territories. Public sector employees deserve full
protection under the OSH Act, especially given their
critical role in disaster preparation, response, and
recovery.
OCCUPATIONAL INJURIES AND ILLNESSES CAN
BE PREVENTED IF WORKPLACE HAZARDS ARE
CORRECTLY IDENTIFIED AND ELIMINATED OR
ADEQUATELY CONTROLLED
n	 The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) should
work with the U.S. Centers for Disease Control
and Prevention (CDC) and the Office of Personnel
Management to develop a coordinated, climaterelevant, and publicly accessible national
surveillance system for occupational health and
safety. Comprehensive and timely collection, analysis,
and interpretation of occupational illness and injury
data—known as “surveillance”—is an essential first
step in developing plans to improve worker health.249
Unfortunately, occupational health surveillance systems
in the United States suffer from multiple shortcomings,
particularly when it comes to climate-related health
conditions. These shortcomings include underreporting
of illnesses and injuries by workers and employers;
inconsistent identification of deaths that occur years
after occupational exposure to harmful agents like
wildfire smoke and toxic chemicals; lack of a “one-stop
shop” for data on exposure, injury, illness, and death;
inadequate tracking of injuries among migrant and 
seasonal farmworkers; inconsistent tracking of heatrelated and disaster-related deaths and illnesses; and the
absence of relevant demographic data (e.g., occupation,
industry, and employment status) in some databases.250
A national, standardized tracking system is crucial to
understanding the scope of the problem and being able to
adequately address it.
n	 Congress should amend Section 20 of the OSH Act
to explicitly direct the CDC’s National Institute
for Occupational Safety and Health (NIOSH)
to expand its climate change research, and to
ensure NIOSH is sufficiently funded to carry out
the research.251 Despite a recent uptick in scientific
interest in the occupational health harms of climate
change, remarkably little is known about how climate
hazards other than heat affect workers.252 Even the heat
research hasn’t adequately explored questions such as
the economic costs and benefits of heat interventions.253
These information gaps hamper the ability of
workers, occupational health and safety activists and
professionals, employers, and regulators to design
and implement protective strategies and policies.254
For instance, the California Occupational Safety and
Health Administration in 2019 established an emergency
regulation requiring employers to provide special masks
to their outdoor workers to protect them from wildfire
smoke. However, no one is sure how well the masks
will work in the real world.255 NIOSH is one of the
institutions best poised to lead policy-relevant research
on health—it now needs the mandate and funding to be
able to do so.256
n	 The Department of Labor should work with
NIOSH and other federal agencies to develop a
comprehensive plan to address the cumulative
threats of climate change. Workers don’t face
climate-related hazards in isolation. For example,
moving work hours to cooler periods to avoid heat
ends up increasing the likelihood of encountering
disease-carrying mosquitoes.257 The personal protective
equipment used to avoid wildfire smoke and valley fever
increases the risk of heat-related illnesses (Spotlight
12).258 Furthermore, climate change exacerbates existing
economic stressors on both workers and employers. Any
federal plan to improve worker health and safety must
keep these inter-connected variables and risks in mind.
n	 Congress and the administration should look for
creative ways to help professionalize disaster
response and recovery across multiple sectors,
including through job creation and training
programs and climate information support to
labor unions and employers. As weather extremes
continue to get more frequent and intense, increasing
numbers of workers are acting as disaster responders,
but without appropriate training, technical support,
or pay (Spotlight 13).259 In one extreme example, the
Instituto de Educación Popular del Sur de California
documented multiple cases of domestic workers—who
earn just $10,000 to $20,000 per year—tasked with
protecting their employers’ homes and pets during the
2018 Woolsey Fire in California.260 Disaster responders,
both professional and ad hoc, need increased support. 
SPOTLIGHT 12: BURT VILLALBA, TELEPHONE
LINE TECHNICIAN, CWA LOCAL 9423, SAN JOSE,
CALIFORNIA
“The wildfire in Paradise was the worst I’ve ever seen in 20 years
of doing telephone line repair. The whole town was completely
destroyed, burned down to the foundations. If you walked down a
block, maybe you’d see one house still standing.
“I also repaired lines in and around wildfires in Napa, Clear
Lake, and Redding [in 2018], and the extent of the damage over
hundreds of miles was shocking. We started our days at 5:30
a.m. and worked until seven at night, seven days a week for eight
months straight with no days off, trying to restore service. We were
tearing down old telephones poles, cell phone towers and lines,
and replacing them with new ones.
“We were constantly breathing in smoke and ash and covered head
to toe in soot. You could taste the toxic chemicals from the smoke
in the back of your throat. The company gave us thin dust masks,
but a lot of us didn’t want to wear them because in the intense
heat, they make it hard to breathe. In Clear Lake, it was over 100
degrees multiple days in a row. One coworker got heatstroke so
bad he couldn’t walk. He nearly passed out and had to miss a
couple days of work.
“Our attitude is ‘Just get the job done,’ and we do what it takes
despite the heat exhaustion and smoke. But I wonder what longterm effects those chemicals will have on me. I’m a father of four,
and I hope I’m around to spend time with my grandkids.” 

SPOTLIGHT 13: DEBRA BRYANT, IN-HOME SUPPORTIVE SERVICES PROVIDER, SEIU LOCAL 2015,
WILLITS, CALIFORNIA
“I’ve lived in Willits near California’s Redwood Valley for 30 years, and recently the forest fires have
gone mad. The winds are crazy, and the fires are hotter and faster than ever before. This is really
dangerous for more isolated, rural areas and our growing senior population in those communities.
“For the past five years I’ve been working as an in-home supportive services provider, caring for
seniors and people with disabilities. I put my entire heart into my job—it’s very personal, and I
become bonded to my clients.
“In October 2017, hundreds of wildfires broke out all over Northern California and were so out of
control that they cut off Highway 101. My town is 1,500 feet up in the mountains and that highway
is our only way in or out. We also had no way to communicate or get information because all the
landlines and cell towers had burned, leaving us with no phones, radio, or internet.
“I didn’t know what was going on until all of a sudden I found out that the fires were only a mile away. I became really worried about the client I
was taking care of and the two senior complexes in town. I couldn’t get hold of the local social services agency or the sheriff, so I went myself
to see a friend who worked at one of the senior facilities. I told her we needed to do something, and she said, ‘Go door to door and ask the
residents if they have a way to get out. If not, we’ll commandeer the facility’s vans and evacuate them to a shelter.’ There was no pre-designed
plan to get folks out of there.
“Fortunately, that fire was brought under control before it destroyed our town, but the smoke and ash were choking. I have asthma, and the
smoky air caused me to have frequent coughing, tightness in my throat, sinus infections, and a heaviness in my chest when I tried to breathe.
Prior to becoming a home care worker, I was a respiratory therapist, and with my professional experience I was anxious about people with
chronic obstructive pulmonary diseases like emphysema.
“Then, in October 2019, Pacific Gas and Electric preemptively shut off power in our area for four days to prevent its equipment from causing
another outbreak of wildfires during high winds. But the power shutoff was a crisis in its own way. The temperature dropped down to 24 degrees
at night, and our house was freezing because like most people around here, we have electric heat. To cook, we set up a propane camping stove
on the deck.
“Another problem was that the power outage shut off medical devices such as oxygen machines and ventilators that seniors relied on.
Concentrators, the machines that make oxygen-rich gas from the surrounding air, couldn’t run, and the local company that sells oxygen tanks
ran out. My home care client at the time was a woman in her 60s with a chronic disease, and she could have gone unconscious or died if her
oxygen didn’t last.
“Even though home care providers and their families were suffering during the shutoff, they really went above and beyond for their clients. One
caregiver took hot water and blankets to a client, another stayed at the client’s home the entire time, and one brought the client to stay at her
own house. If it hadn’t been for home care workers, people would have died.
“These climate-related disasters are going to get worse, and more remote areas of the country will be particularly hard hit. We need local
governments, home care agencies, and health care facilities to put plans in place and prepare. For example, we need solar panels that can kick
in during power outages, especially for nursing homes and hospitals. We need a system to track, contact, and quickly evacuate seniors and
people with disabilities. We also need to increase the number of home care workers in our rural communities and improve their jobs so we can
recruit and retain caregivers. With the aging population, home care workers are the first responders who will go out, check on people, and save
lives.”

OCCUPATIONAL SAFETY AND HEALTH LAWS
AND REGULATIONS NEED TO BE ESTABLISHED,
PERIODICALLY UPDATED, AND RIGOROUSLY
ENFORCED
n	 OSHA should establish an enforceable federal
heat health standard for all workers based on
the 2016 recommendations made by NIOSH and
the July 2018 Public Citizen petition to OSHA.261
OSHA’s General Duty Clause requires employers to
supply “employment and a place of employment which
are free from recognized hazards that are causing or are
likely to cause death or serious physical harm to [their]
employees.”262 The General Duty Clause hypothetically
protects workers from hazards that aren’t covered by
specific regulatory standards, such as extreme heat.263
However, many employers aren’t even taking basic steps
to protect workers from heat, and OSHA rarely enforces
the General Duty Clause.264 Water, rest, and shade are
the three most fundamental elements of workplace heat
health programs.265 Yet in an analysis of 84 federal OSHA
heat enforcement actions from 2012 to 2013, researchers
found that nearly a quarter of the cited employers didn’t
provide adequate access to water, and more than a third
didn’t provide shade or a cool indoor space in which to
rest.266 Furthermore, the General Duty Clause is difficult
to enforce because it has particularly stringent rules
about evidence. The Occupational Safety and Health
Review Commission set a dangerous precedent in
February 2019 when it overturned an OSHA citation to a
roofing company for the heatstroke death of a temporary
worker, based in part on a perceived lack of evidence of
a heat hazard.267 This case only reinforces the dire need
for an enforceable federal heat health standard.
n	 OSHA should expedite its review and update of the
existing emergency response and preparedness
standards. Many of the federal workplace standards
for emergency response and preparedness are decades
out of date, are not comprehensive, and do not consider
the effects of climate change. For example, hospitals are
supposed to create emergency action plans to protect
employees from hazardous substances, but there do not
appear to be any requirements to develop evacuation
plans in case of a hurricane or other extreme weather
event.268 OSHA has been “considering updating these
standards” since at least 2014 but has made little
progress.269 They should expedite that process now, and
ensure that any new or revised standards are designed to
withstand future climate conditions.
n	 Congress should ensure that OSHA has enough
budget and staffing for timely and effective
enforcement. OSHA’s general lack of enforcement
capacity makes it difficult for the agency to hold
employers accountable for workplace health and
safety.270 According to the AFL-CIO, there was only one
federal or state inspector for every 79,262 workers in
fiscal year (FY) 2018.271 For context, the International
Labor Organization recommends that developed nations
have one labor inspector for every 10,000 workers.272
Moreover, OSHA worksite inspections for heat
violations declined 43 percent between FY 2016 and
FY 2018, and OSHA investigated only a quarter of the
occupational deaths reported from 2014 to 2017 by the
BLS.273 Worker safety standards will continue to mean
little unless OSHA has the funding and manpower to
enforce them.
n	 Congress should ask the U.S. Government
Accountability Office to evaluate OSHA’s current
use of maximum penalties where warranted and
consider directing OSHA to further increase those
maximums. Under the Obama administration, OSHA
significantly increased civil penalties for employers
for the first time since 1990.274 The agency also started
making yearly adjustments for inflation.275 Even so, the
penalties may be too low to deter unsafe behavior, and
OSHA isn’t required to consider whether employers
will benefit from noncompliance when it determines
penalties.276 As of January 2020, maximum OSHA
penalties were $13,494 for each single violation and
$134,937 for each “willful or repeated” violation.277 The
problem is made worse by OSHA’s regular practice of
reducing penalties in an effort to avoid formal challenges
from employers.278 Such challenges can significantly
delay corrective actions and impose additional
administrative burdens on OSHA. 

COLLECTIVE ACTION BY WORKERS AND THEIR
REPRESENTATIVES IS AN ESSENTIAL ELEMENT
OF WORKPLACE HEALTH AND SAFETY
n	 Legislators at all levels of government must
honor the right of workers to a safe and healthy
workplace by strengthening and enforcing legal
protections for unionization and collective
bargaining.
279 To stay safe on the job, workers and their
representatives must have adequate knowledge, training,
and freedom from retaliation to help shape and improve
occupational health programs (Spotlight 14), refuse
hazardous work, report workplace injuries and illnesses,
and file complaints with state or federal inspectors.280
Federal and state policies and standards are clearly
important, but as occupational health and safety expert
Celeste Monforton recently wrote, “Every worker health
and safety accomplishment came about by agitating and
organizing.”281 Unionization and collective bargaining,
which are rights codified by the National Labor Relations
Act, often provide more protection to workers than
OSHA does.282 However, union representation of workers
has declined nationwide since the 1950s, in part because
of aggressive anti-union tactics by private sector
employers.283 Protecting the right to collective action
is, quite simply, a crucial part of increasing workplace
safety.
SPOTLIGHT 14: ROBERT HOGUE, SPLICING
TECHNICIAN, CWA LOCAL 9423, SAN LUIS
OBISPO, CALIFORNIA
“I’ve been a telephone line technician for 20 years, and during
that time heat, wildfires and poor air quality have become major
problems directly impacting me and my coworkers.
“You may not realize it, but your cell phone service relies on wires
just like your landline. Every cell phone tower has wires feeding
it, and my job is to connect those wires up, install new cables,
and troubleshoot when repairs are needed. We’ve been seeing
summers getting hotter and hotter, wildfires increasing, and
records being broken year after year. That’s an empirical fact.
Wildfires are a product of dry heat and drought, and when they
ignite they burn up telephone poles, cell phone towers, and cables,
leaving people with no way to communicate.
“We’re always trying to keep customers’ telephone service
alive, but it’s exhausting work and can cause heat illness. Heat
exhaustion can hit you when you’re climbing a telephone pole or
crawling under a house or through an attic. The extreme heat we’re
seeing nowadays is especially hard on older workers because
they have a lower threshold. I’ve had two coworkers who had to
go to the emergency room because it was scorching hot out and
the air quality was compromised from wildfires, even though they
were hundreds of miles away. Some days it’s so bad your eyes and
throat are burning, you’re coughing, and you can taste the ash in
your mouth. It affects my family and home life as well. My stepson
has had asthma attacks, and we’ve had to cancel his football team
practices because of the smoky air.
“Unfortunately, our employer is being very reactive instead of
proactive, and they’re not giving us the tools we need to address
these dangerous conditions. They only give us flimsy dust masks
when they should be giving us respirators with cartridges that
can really filter the particles out of the air. We need to take breaks
and sit in our vans with the air-conditioning on to cool down
sometimes, but the company remotely tracks us and reprimands us
if we’re idling too long.
“Overall, we need to set up a committee of workers and employer
representatives to create a plan that outlines what to do if the air
quality drops or temperature soars, and how to communicate with
workers quickly, such as through text alerts. A labor–management
committee could make sure the voices of frontline technicians are
being heard and help address these unsafe working conditions
we’re experiencing because of the changing climate.”

Climate change isn’t some faraway or future health threat;
it’s harming U.S. workers now.
Many workers are already unable to avoid climate-related
hazards to their health and safety because of the location
of their work, the physical demands or compensation
structure of their jobs, or unsafe or discriminatory
practices at their workplace. To help today’s workers,
we need lawmakers, regulators, employers, unions, other
worker organizations, and workers themselves to start
adapting to a fundamentally different world.
Adapting to our new climate means overhauling existing
safeguards to respond to an intensified set of occupational
hazards; extending occupational health and safety
protections to all workers; and ensuring workers have
the training, job security, flexibility, and empowerment
they need to collectively demand protection from climate
change. Because climate disruption is sure to create
cascading failures through multiple sectors and to bring
some nasty surprises, occupational health and safety
activists and professionals must also build a better way to
track, analyze, and quickly act on existing and emerging
health threats to workers.
Of course, there are biological, logistical, economic,
and legal barriers and limits to how much workers and
employers can adapt to unchecked climate change. In the
near future, for instance, some parts of the world simply
may not have enough heat-safe days for outdoor workers
to do their jobs without risk.284 Although workers, unions,
employers, and regulators must continually improve health
and safety measures to keep ahead of harmful changes in
climate, the United States and the world must also limit
future warming by moving away from deadly fossil fuels
and drawing climate-warming carbon pollution out of the
atmosphere.285
Everybody deserves to get through their workday safely.
That’s always been true, and never more so than now.
Protecting worker health from the impacts of the climate
crisis is fully within our grasp—but will only get harder the
longer we wait to act. 