OCEAN-CLIMATE
GUIDE TO ACTION

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We would like to acknowledge reviewers from the Ocean Protection Council, the Ocean Science Trust, the California Air
Resources Board, the California Department of Fish and Wildlife, the Resources Legacy Fund, as well as Geraldine Knatz,
Michelle Passero, and Leila Seivenan for reviewing select chapters of this Guide to Action. 

INTRODUCTION
I
n 2015 at COP21, nearly 200 countries adopted the Paris Agreement. Parties to
this historic accord committed to take steps both to limit warming to well under
2 degrees Celsius above preindustrial levels and to increase resilience to the
impacts of climate change. Healthy oceans are a crucial component in the global
fight against climate change, but only a handful of countries currently include
meaningful ocean-based mitigation and adaptation actions in their plans to meet their
Paris goals.
This Ocean-Climate Guide to Action provides options
for addressing this omission, which carries a heavy cost.
Globally, ocean-based economic activities are estimated to
be worth over a trillion dollars annually (USD), supporting
hundreds of millions of jobs and providing protein to
billions of people.1 More fundamentally, our oceans
provide services that make life on earth possible, such
as producing oxygen and storing excess heat and carbon
dioxide, thereby slowing the rate of catastrophic warming.
The oceans are critical to the global fight against climate
change.
One example of their importance in that fight is through
the conservation and restoration of coastal “blue carbon”
ecosystems, which is an essential pillar of a strong climate
mitigation strategy. Seagrasses, mangrove forests, and
salt marshes are particularly effective at capturing and
sequestering carbon dioxide. When they are degraded,
they not only fail to act as carbon sinks but also become
sources of greenhouse gas emissions.
In addition, countries must also act to adapt to the
impacts of climate change that we are observing in the
oceans and along our coasts. Greenhouse gas emissions
are causing an increasingly warm, deoxygenated, and
acidic marine environment. Consequently, coral reefs are
bleaching, marine ecosystems are degrading, and fisheries
are moving poleward. We are observing more rapid and
intense ice sheet melting, leading to faster and higher
projections of sea level rise. We must prepare our coastal
communities for these changes.
Long regarded as a leader in climate policy and ocean
conservation, the state of California has become a
pioneer in the intersection of these fields. Over the
past two decades, California has steadily developed
a comprehensive vision of ocean-climate action that
could serve as a model to other subnational and national
governments seeking to protect the oceans and use their
power to combat climate change.
This Ocean-Climate Guide to Action is a partial snapshot
of California’s efforts to preserve natural carbon stores
in marine and coastal habitats, reduce carbon emissions
in ocean industries, and protect marine ecosystems
and coastal communities from the most severe impacts
of climate change. These case studies are meant to
introduce nations, states, local governments, and
others to a wide variety of tested and effective
ocean-climate actions that they might take.
Ultimately, the oceans sustain us all. We hope this guide
will inspire jurisdictions everywhere, whether coastal
or not, to support policies, practices, and projects that
ensure healthy and thriving oceans.



CHAPTER 1: GOVERNANCE AND FUNDING
I
n 2004 the California Legislature adopted the California Ocean Protection Act (COPA), creating
the Ocean Protection Council (OPC).2
 This first-of-its-kind governmental institution was
intended to promote comprehensive and coordinated ocean and coastal management as the
ocean program of the California Natural Resources Agency. Chaired by the secretary for Natural
Resources, the seven-member council includes the secretary for Environmental Protection
as well as representatives from the state legislature and the public. OPC is charged with coordinating
state policy and scientific data collection related to coast and ocean resources among agencies as well as
identifying and recommending changes in law to the legislature to improve coastal and ocean management.
OPC helps coordinate activities of state agencies that work on ocean and coastal issues, including the
California Coastal Conservancy, California Coastal Commission, the San Francisco Bay Conservation and
Development Commission, State Water Board, Department of Fish and Wildlife, and others.
FOUNDING INNOVATIVE INSTITUTIONS FOR OCEAN SCIENCE
AND PROTECTION
COPA also required OPC to establish a multidisciplinary
team of science advisers to help it meet its
responsibilities. Established in 2008, the Ocean
Protection Council Science Advisory Team (OPC SAT)
provides scientific analysis and advice to OPC and works
to ensure that OPC decisions are informed by the best
available science. Its members come from academic
institutions, state and federal agencies, and California
tribes. OPC SAT has provided scientific advice and
evaluation on a wide range of topics to address issues
impacting coastal and marine ecosystems in California.
In addition, the California Ocean Science Trust (OST), an
independent nonprofit, was created by statute to provide
independent science to support state decisions.3
 Its
executive director serves as a science adviser to OPC.
Key Elements of Success
n	 Inclusive structures that ensure coordination across
all branches of government
n	 Significant funding that, when leveraged with additional
funding and the work of partner organizations, helps to
address the complex problems facing California’s vast
coastline4
n	 A foundation in and access to science via OPC SAT and
OST, which helps to inform and shape effective policy

CALIFORNIA’S CAP-AND-TRADE PROGRAM AND CALIFORNIA
CLIMATE INVESTMENTS
The cap-and-trade program is a key element of California’s
climate plan. It sets a statewide limit on the GHG sources
responsible for 85 percent of California’s emissions, with
the limit declining over time. The program also establishes
the carbon price signal needed to drive long-term
investment in cleaner fuels and energy efficiency. CARB
spent more than two years in a public process designing
the initial cap-and-trade program.6 It considered other
examples and structured California’s program to eliminate
deficiencies that had plagued other initiatives.7
 The result
is an expansive cap-and-trade program that is regarded as
one of the best designed in the world.
In addition to placing a firm limit on GHG emissions,
the cap-and-trade program also generates funds for the
state. Each quarter, CARB holds an auction to sell a
portion of cap-and-trade emissions allowances into the
market. The proceeds from the sale of the state-owned
emissions allowances are deposited into the Greenhouse
Gas Reduction Fund, or GGRF, to be used by the state
for California Climate Investments (CCI). In 2014, the
California Legislature dedicated 60 percent of each capand-trade auction’s proceeds to reducing GHG emissions
in the transportation sector.8 Portions of the funds are
also set aside for a manufacturer tax credit, certain
fire prevention activities, coastal adaptation, and safe
drinking water protections.9
 The remaining funds are
appropriated on an annual basis to a suite of programs,
spanning multiple sectors of the economy that facilitate
GHG emissions reductions. As required by statute, funds
appropriated to CCI programs must be used to facilitate
GHG emission reductions, benefit priority populations,
and maximize other environmental, public health, and
economic benefits. As of August 2019, almost $12 billion
in funding had been deposited into the GGRF. These have
included funds for coastal planning.
Key Elements of Success
Two key factors have been critical to the success
of California’s cap-and-trade program:
n	 bold leadership
n	 thoughtful and detailed design
Other jurisdictions considering a cap-and-trade program
should assess whether they can create the necessary
leadership to drive implementation, whether and to what
extent the California model or other models can serve the
jurisdiction, and what priorities and safeguards should
be integrated into the program to help ensure political
viability and long-term success.

California’s path to a cap-and-trade program formally began in 2006 with the passage of AB
32, the nation’s first comprehensive climate change policy. AB 32, and subsequent climate
legislation, set state greenhouse gas (GHG) emission reduction targets and charged the
California Air Resources Board (CARB) with identifying strategies to meet those targets.

FINANCING NATURAL RESOURCE INVESTMENTS WITH BONDS
Since 1988 California voters have approved nearly $26.6
billion in general obligation bonds for investment in a
broad range of natural resource projects through a series
of successful statewide ballot measures.11 The most
recently approved bond, Proposition 68 (2018), included
more than $200 million for ocean, bay, and coastal
protection programs, approximately 5 percent of the total
$4 billion approved.12 California resource bonds often
include efforts to protect or restore coastal and ocean
areas. The two resources bonds prior to that, Proposition
1 (2014) and Proposition 84 (2006), allocated between 1
to 8 percent in ocean and coastal work, with investments
largely driven by legislative priorities, environmental
advocates, and campaign donors.13
Successful implementation of a natural resources bond
requires tracking funding through the state budget process
and monitoring funding program development; it may also
include stakeholder advocacy to provide guidance on how
to spend funds. Ideally, programs should be coordinated
and leveraged across California’s state agencies.
Key Elements of Success
n	 Opinion research on voter priorities to guide ballot
measure drafting
n	 Environmental advocates with expertise to pursue
dedicated funding for their priorities and capacity
to execute campaigns in support of bond measures
n	 Ocean and coastal champions in the legislature
n	 Capacity of California state agencies to administer
funding programs and projects in partnership with
community-based organizations
n	 Strong public support for environmental protection
Other jurisdictions interested in pursuing bond funding
for ocean and coastal climate adaptation work should
compare the cost of financing general obligation bonds
with the cost of other potentially more sustainable and
less expensive ways of investing in adaptation.14 Other
important considerations include the need to conduct
broad stakeholder outreach, and the jurisdiction’s
willingness and capacity to oversee and administer
funding when it becomes available. 

California’s push to use bonds to finance investments in the state’s natural resources began
in the late 1920s but accelerated in the late 1980s when the state struggled through two
economic recessions. During those recessions it became clear that natural resource
investments would fall far down the list of budget priorities when state funds were
limited.10 In response to the need for dedicated funding, California state legislators and
environmental advocates began working outside the state budget process to craft language for, campaign
for, and work to implement natural resource bond measures. 

PROMOTING BLUE CARBON SOLUTIONS TO MITIGATE
CLIMATE CHANGE
On an areal basis, coastal vegetated habitats, such as
wetlands and seagrass beds, hold some of the highest
concentrations of organic carbon of any ecosystem on
the planet and serve as globally important sinks for
carbon.17 Because California is pursuing an integrated
and multi-benefit approach to nature conservation,
the state is prioritizing the conservation of these “blue
carbon” habitats, which offer numerous co-benefits
including increasing the capacity of coastal communities
to withstand the impacts of storms and sea-level rise,
providing critical nursery habitat for fishes, and improving
water quality. Significant investments in wetland
restoration are already underway in the San Joaquin
Delta, for example, via the Wetlands Restoration for
Greenhouse Gas Reduction Program.
18
California is also exploring cutting-edge techniques
to use natural habitats to mitigate the effects of ocean
acidification. With the passage of SB 1363, the Ocean
Acidification and Hypoxia Reduction Program, the Ocean
Protection Council, in consultation with the California
State Coastal Conservancy, was tasked with exploring
how submerged aquatic vegetation (e.g., seagrass beds
and kelp) might ameliorate ocean acidification and
hypoxia locally through photosynthesis.19 The resulting
report, Emerging Understanding of the Potential Role of
Seagrass and Kelp as an Ocean Acidification Management
Tool in California, is the first step toward developing
local management strategies to reduce the risk of ocean
acidification in select coastal habitats.
20
Key Elements of Success
n	 Engagement of scientific experts, coastal partners,
and leadership
n	 Education of policymakers on the specific attributes
and benefits of a blue carbon approach.

In 2015, Governor Jerry Brown proposed ambitious greenhouse gas reduction goals for the state
of California and called for policies that would use the carbon storage ability of natural and
working lands to help achieve those goals. In 2016 the California legislature reinforced this
vision by passing Senate Bill 1386, which identifies the preservation and enhancement of natural
carbon stores as a key strategy to reduce emissions.15 In 2019 the state released the draft 2030
Natural and Working Lands Climate Change Implementation Plan.
16 This plan sets out to double the pace
and scale of wetland and seagrass conservation by 2030 and identifies a potential pathway to success. 

MARINE RENEWABLE ENERGY: FOSTERING OFFSHORE WIND
DEVELOPMENT THROUGH MULTIAGENCY INITIATIVES
In 2010, OPC established the California Marine Renewable
Energy Working Group (CMREWG). The CMREWG is
comprised of state agencies working to improve regulatory
coordination among state and federal agencies with
jurisdiction relevant to marine renewable energy.23 In
addition to addressing regulatory issues around offshore
wind development, the working group is currently
identifying and prioritizing information, research, and
planning needs for permitting offshore wind energy
projects.24
In 2016 then governor Jerry Brown requested that the
secretary of the U.S. Department of the Interior establish
a marine renewable energy task force, primarily in
response to a proposal by Trident Winds LLC to build a
765-megawatt wind farm on the Outer Continental Shelf.25
The request was granted. California’s Intergovernmental
Renewable Energy Task Force (RE Task Force), is a
partnership of federal, state, tribal, and local governments
that is jointly led by the CEC and the Bureau of Ocean
Energy Management (BOEM). The RE Task Force is a
forum where members can offer critical information to
inform planning efforts, raise concerns, share data, and
identify information gaps.26 California’s RE Task Force
positions California to better influence BOEM’s Outer
Continental Shelf leasing decisions.
OPC is providing funding for a variety of studies, including
an offshore wind feasibility analysis for Northern
California, a synthesis of relevant environmental data for
Central and Northern California, and an assessment of
jobs that offshore wind could provide the state.27
Key Elements of Success
n	 Creation of a California Intergovernmental Renewable
Energy Task Force with federal, state, and tribal
government participation to foster collaboration at
all levels of government
n	 Legislation to set robust renewables and emissions
reductions targets
n	 State leadership with money to invest in environmental
data collection, development of monitoring technology,
and marine renewable energy technology research
n	 Government-funding for research institutions to
undertake needed studies
Jurisdictions that are contemplating advancing marine
renewables should consider how existing or new policies
might drive development of marine renewables, how to
create leadership necessary to drive working group and
task force products, how jurisdictions can partner with
research institutions to acquire information needed to
make decisions, and how to engage all parties in the
process. 

California’s renewable energy legislation—the California Global Warming Solutions Act—
became law in 2006. Spurred by California’s ambitious renewable energy targets, state
agencies began to evaluate how they could harness offshore winds and waves to produce
marine renewable energy alongside land-based renewables.21 By 2018, with legislation
requiring California to transition to 100 percent renewable energy by December 31, 2045,
commercial and state interest in offshore wind development in California has increased greatly.22 Today
the California Energy Commission (CEC) leads the state’s offshore wind efforts, and the Ocean Protection
Council (OPC) works to ensure that any offshore wind development minimizes impacts to marine life,
fisheries, and cultural resources. 
REQUIRING CARGO SHIPS TO USE SHORESIDE POWER
In the late 2000s, the ports began implementing cold
ironing options.32 In 2007 CARB adopted the At-Berth
Regulation, applicable to the Ports of Los Angeles,
Long Beach, Oakland, San Diego, San Francisco,
and Hueneme.33 The policy provides two options of
compliance: either turning off the vessel’s engine and
connecting to shore power, or using alternative technology
that reduces emissions to the same levels as cold ironing.
The regulation sets a phase-in compliance schedule with
rates and dates detailing the changing requirements over
time.34 Phase-in began with a goal of 50 percent emissions
reduction by 2014 and ramps up to a final goal of 80
percent emissions reduction by 2020. To encourage early
compliance, CARB created financial incentives through
state grant funding. These changes have reduced the
public health risk to neighboring communities and reduced
regional emissions.35
To enforce the At-Berth Regulation, enforcement staff
conducts audits of vessel fleets. For example, CARB
conducted 128 fleet audits from 2014 to 2016, reviewing
more than 12,000 vessel port visits. 36 CARB has reported
that, on average, ports in California have achieved their
targets, with a 51 percent reduction of onboard auxiliary
engine power use while at berth in 2015 and a 63 percent
reduction in 2016.37 In 2016, simply by using electricity
instead of diesel while at berth, fleets reduced NOx
emissions by 4.3 tons per day and PM emissions by 0.066
tons per day.38 CARB also estimates this policy reduces
CO2 emissions in California by 0.5 million metric tons
annually.39
Key Elements of Success
n	 Persistent pressure from stakeholders to reduce port
emissions and leadership to address environmental
justice issues in near-port communities
n	 Financial incentives for early adopters of the At-Berth
Regulation
Jurisdictions considering a cold-ironing regulation should
keep in mind that California, beyond just creating a
regulation, funded the early adoption of shore power and
ship technology.

California ports handle more than 40 percent of all inbound cargo containers to the entire
United States.28 Local pollution from port emissions presents a significant air quality
concern for communities because of the host of health problems to which these emissions
are linked.29 Pressure and litigation from communities to clean up the air led California
ports to consider options to reduce port pollution. The California Air Resources Board
(CARB) evaluated cold ironing—that is, having ships plug into shore power—at various ports in 2006. In
its analysis, CARB estimated that ship emissions would triple by 2020 under business as usual.30 But if
modified dockside facilities could allow vessels to use shoreside power, diesel particulate matter (PM) and
nitrogen oxides (NOx) emissions would decrease by 95 percent and CO2
 emissions would decrease by 22 to
38 percent.31


CLEANER FUEL IN OCEAN-GOING VESSELS
Despite opposition from the shipping industry, the
California Environmental Protection Agency (CalEPA)
and then governor Arnold Schwarzenegger advocated
for the reduction of diesel pollution by requiring OGVs to
burn cleaner fuel.41 In 2007, the state approved a twophase policy to limit sulfur; however, after 14 months of
successful implementation, the regulation was suspended
due to a lawsuit brought by its opponents. A federal
District Court ruled that the policy was preempted by
the federal Clean Air Act; therefore California would
need authorization from the U.S. EPA to enforce its
separate emissions standards.42 At the same time, the
Ports of Los Angeles and Long Beach played an active
role in addressing shipping companies’ concerns about
transitioning to lower-sulfur fuel. In 2008 the Ports
launched a one-year program to pay the differential
between the dirtier fuel and the low-sulfur fuel, saving the
shipping companies money and incentivizing them to make
the switch.43 Maersk also provided proof of concept for
other shippers by testing the lower-sulfur fuels.44
In 2008 the state pursued a new fuel sulfur regulation
that would bypass the Clean Air Act by focusing on “use
and operational requirements” instead of an “emissions
limit.”45
Still, in 2011, the California Air Resources Board (CARB)
found that many vessel operators avoided the added
expense of the cleaner fuel by rerouting through parts of
the ocean outside the regulation boundary. Ultimately the
adjustment in these travel patterns resulted in increased
emissions. To address this issue, in 2011 CARB amended
the policy’s regulatory boundary to better capture traffic.46
California is now the world leader in enforcing marine
fuel sulfur regulations. In 2017, 324 inspections were
done; all but 10 ships met the 0.1 percent sulfur standard,
for a compliance rate of 97 percent. The 10 failures were
assessed $87,500 in penalties.47
CARB has investigated alternative methods of compliance
that may further reduce emissions. As of 2017, it began
offering a research exemption to OGVs that agree to test
an exhaust treatment device or other technology while
using noncompliant fuel.48 This temporary exemption
encourages technological exploration by shipping lines to
further reduce emissions of their own accord.
Key Elements of Success
n	 Political leadership and funding to offer a proof
of concept before the regulation went into effect
n	 Penalties are set so it is cheaper to comply than
to pay the fines
Jurisdictions should be aware that vessels may attempt
to change routes to avoid fuel switching and therefore
increase emissions. Policymakers should also factor in
a way for the regulatory zone to change, to allow for the
possibility that shipping lanes could change. 

The Fuel Sulfur Regulation, officially titled, “Fuel Sulfur and Other Operational
Requirements for Ocean-Going Vessels (OGVs) within California Waters and 24 Nautical
Miles of the California Baseline,” requires ships to transition to cleaner fuels before
coming within 24 nautical miles (nm) of the California coast.
VOLUNTARY VESSEL SPEED REDUCTION PROGRAM
A broader action plan to bring the air basin into
compliance with California’s quality air standards first
focused on reducing nitrous oxide (NOx) emissions from
ocean-going vessels entering and leaving California’s
ports.50 It was then that the California Air Resources
Board (CARB) and the U.S. Environmental Protection
Agency (EPA) noticed reductions in NOx emissions when
ocean-going vessels slowed for safety purposes when
entering ports.When vessel speed was reduced from 24
knots to 12 knots, NOx emissions dropped by as much as
56 percent.51
In 2001 the EPA, CARB, the Port of Los Angeles (POLA),
the Port of Long Beach (POLB), shipping industry
representatives, and the U.S. Navy entered into a
memorandum of understanding outlining the first VSRP
in California. The initial memorandum expired in 2004,
but the POLA and the POLB have modified the VSRP
to further reduce emissions and encourage voluntary
participation with financial incentives.52 The POLA
attributes much of its success in reducing vessel pollution
to the VSRP strategy.
Although the desire to reduce NOx emissions drove
the initial policy, the program has brought about other
clean air and climate benefits.53 Between 2005 and 2016,
by implementing the VSRP and additional air quality
improvement measures for ocean-going vessels, the
POLA cut NOx emissions by 40 percent, diesel particulate
matter emissions by 90 percent, sulfur oxide emissions
by 98 percent, and greenhouse gas emissions from oceangoing vessels by 28 percent.54 In 2018 the POLA found that
91 percent of the more than 3,000 ocean-going vessels
entering and leaving the harbor were slowing within a 20
nm distance, and 85 percent within 40 nm.55
The Ports of San Diego, San Francisco Bay, and the
Santa Barbara Channel region have since adopted
VSRPs to reduce air pollution and protect whale
populations in the area.
Key Elements of Success
n	 Creating a voluntary program with financial incentives
rather than a mandate, to reduce pushback from the
shipping industry
n	 Providing proper incentives, realistic guidelines,
and appropriate speed-tracking systems for program
implementation .

Avoluntary Vessel Speed Reduction Program (VSRP) incentivizes ocean-going vessels to
slow down while coming into California seaports in order to reduce emissions of climate
pollutants. Ships participating in the VSRP have the option to reduce their speed at either
40 nautical miles (nm) or 20 nm from shore.49 The first program of this kind in California
stemmed from growing concerns about air pollution in areas surrounding California’s
ports, particularly in the South Coast Air Basin.

Spurred by California’s first climate change assessment, a 2008 executive order directed
state officials to develop a statewide adaptation strategy.56 The Safeguarding California
Plan outlines adaptation goals across sectors including ocean and coastal resources.57
Subsequently, a 2015 executive order required that the plan be updated every three years.58
The state released its most recent assessment (its fourth) in 2018.

ADOPTING A STATEWIDE CLIMATE ADAPTATION STRATEGY
During the initial yearlong planning process in 2009, the
California Natural Resources Agency coordinated with 10
other state agencies; scientists; a consulting team; local,
regional, and federal government entities; and public
stakeholders to develop and adopt the first statewide,
multi-sector adaptation strategy in the United States.60
This process has only expanded since then, with current
engagement even broader, more inclusive, and more
coordinated; the ocean and coastal section of the 2018
plan alone has contributions from a dozen state agencies.61
California’s adaptation plan is not a regulation of nonstate
entities. Instead it is a directive to state agencies to
complete recommended adaptation actions relevant to
each agency’s existing mission and mandates; it outlines
ongoing actions and identifies next steps.
Key Elements of Success
n	 Leadership from the governor, who directed state
agencies to coordinate to address climate impacts
within their respective sectors
n	 Significant existing resources, including California’s
climate change assessments and experts, that allowed
the state to focus on solutions to known impacts
n	 Codification and funding to ensure implementation
over the long term
A jurisdiction weighing a comprehensive adaptation
plan might consider how to first understand the climate
change impacts unique to its jurisdiction; how adaptation
efforts will complement mitigation efforts to increase
resiliency; how to rally existing leadership and efforts and
take advantage of infrastructure and legal mechanisms to
implement recommended actions; and how it might fund
implementation, including on-the-ground projects.

CREATING MARINE PROTECTED AREAS
Since the early 1900s, California has used MPAs as a
tool to preserve especially beautiful and biologically
diverse locations along its coast. However, in 1999 the
California Legislature identified the need to increase the
state’s effectiveness in protecting marine life, habitats,
and ecosystems and passed the Marine Life Protection
Act.64 This legislation mandated that the state Fish
and Game Commission and the California Department
of Fish and Wildlife use the latest science to redesign
and expand the state’s existing system of MPAs into a
network that protects marine ecosystems and California’s
natural heritage and provides improved recreational and
educational opportunities. The law also required the
state agencies to ensure effective MPA management and
enforcement.
From 2004 to 2010, the state worked with a nonprofit
organization, the Resources Legacy Fund, to develop a
public–private implementation model called the Marine
Life Protection Act Initiative.65 The initiative relied in
part on private funding from a philanthropic partner in
addition to state funding, pursued a phased approach to
MPA design based on four coastal subregions, developed
regional stakeholder groups, convened a Blue Ribbon
Task Force composed of public policy experts to oversee
MPA design and evaluation, and created regional science
advisory teams to support MPA design. The process
resulted in a network of 124 MPAs on the coast from the
Mexican border to Oregon, covering slightly more than 16
percent of the state’s waters.66
In 2014 the California Ocean Protection Council (OPC)
was designated as the state’s MPA policy lead. In that role,
OPC convenes a statewide MPA leadership team composed
of members of 15 organizations representing state and
federal government, California and Federal Indian
tribes, local community experts, and philanthropies that
work together to implement the state’s collaboratively
developed MPA Management Program. The program,
designed to facilitate adaptive management, emphasizes
four major priorities: outreach and education,
enforcement and compliance, research and monitoring,
and policy and permitting.67 Initial monitoring of the
network shows signs of success with larger and more
numerous fish, especially in long established MPAs.68
Key Elements of Success
n	 A strong directive in the law
n	 A robust stakeholder engagement component
n	 Science guidelines that outlined criteria for MPA
design to maximize ecosystem benefits
n	 Significant funds to launch the effort and ongoing
funding to ensure management and enforcement
n	 Regional monitoring and management plans based on
partnerships across government, nongovernmental
organizations, California and Federal Indian tribes,
and others.

California’s marine ecosystems are facing multiple, simultaneous climate change impacts,
including ocean acidification, hypoxia, marine heat waves, and disrupted patterns of
seasonal upwelling.62 These large-scale effects, combined with the more immediate
and local stresses of overfishing and land-based pollution, are putting the resilience of
California’s marine ecosystems at risk. Effectively managed Marine Protected Areas
(MPAs) can help restore ecosystems and increase their ability to withstand the stresses of climate change
and ocean acidification.63

PREPARING FOR SEA LEVEL RISE
The United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate
Change report issued in 2014 warned that at least
some amount of sea level rise would be unavoidable.71
Drawing from the call to action in that report, in 2015
then governor Jerry Brown established new interim
statewide greenhouse gas reduction goals and ordered
state agencies to factor climate change into their planning
and investment decisions.72 That same year the legislature
passed SB 379, a bill that required local governments to
incorporate climate adaptation and resiliency strategies
into the safety element of their general plans, as well as
SB 246, which created the Integrated Climate Adaptation
and Resiliency Program to coordinate local and state
adaptation strategies.73
SB 379 requires local governments to conduct a
vulnerability assessment of climate change risks, set
adaptation and resilience goals based on that assessment,
and design an implementation process to achieve the
adaptation goals.74 With the passage of SB 379, new
direction from the governor, and increased scientific
understanding of SLR, the Ocean Protection Council
released a 2018 update to the state’s SLR guidance. The
update included revised SLR projections, a step-by-step
approach for state agencies and local governments to use
in integrating those projections into risk analyses and
planning, and recommended adaptation strategies.75,76
Key Elements of Success
n	 Dedicated state agencies
n	 Access to scientific research, data, and information
n	 Commitment to updating guidance and adaptation
recommendations based on the best available science.
n	 Funding mechanisms available at the state and local
levels to support SLR adaptation work
A jurisdiction weighing how to best prepare for SLR might
consider the unique hazards that SLR presents to its
population and resources, seek to understand what role
leadership might play in coordinating cross-sector efforts,
develop a suite of tools to assist local governments in their
planning efforts, provide access to best-available science
and require it as a basis for decision making, and identify
funds or funding mechanisms to allow ongoing support for
research and on-the-ground projects that address SLR.

Sea level rise (SLR) poses a large threat to California’s economy, infrastructure, and natural
resources. Recognizing this, Governor Arnold Schwarzenegger in 2008 required state
agencies to coordinate a plan to adapt to SLR.69 In response, state agencies produced the
first California SLR guidance in 2010, requiring state agencies to support the development
of best-available SLR projections, and rely on these projections in their decision-making
processes.70

ADDRESSING THE THREAT OF OCEAN ACIDIFICATION
AND HYPOXIA
Ocean acidification (OA) is the progressive change in
ocean chemistry as excess carbon dioxide from the burning
of fossil fuels dissolves into the sea, forming an acid. The
California Current is naturally more acidic and lower
in oxygen (i.e., more hypoxic) than most ocean surface
waters because seasonal upwelling brings CO2-enriched
waters to the surface. These natural conditions make
California’s waters particularly vulnerable to climatedriven ocean acidification and hypoxia (OAH).78
Recognizing the risk that ocean acidification poses to
their industry, shellfish growers created alliances with
West Coast scientists to accelerate their understanding of
the threat and to communicate concerns to government
officials. In 2010 a grassroots network of industry
stakeholders and researchers developed the California
Current Acidification Network.79
In 2012 the governor of Washington, Christine Gregoire,
created the Washington State Blue Ribbon Panel on
Ocean Acidification, the first of its kind in the nation.80
Soon afterward, the California Ocean Protection Council
recognized the need for a regional examination of OA
and of climate-driven expansion of low-oxygen zones.
The council asked California’s Ocean Science Trust to
assemble the West Coast Ocean Acidification & Hypoxia
Science Panel in partnership with Oregon, Washington,
and British Columbia.
Over two years, the panel of 20 leading scientists
developed and released a series of reports, culminating
in its Major Findings, Recommendations, and Actions.
81
In 2016, in response to the panel’s recommendations, the
California Legislature passed two bills, one establishing
an Ocean Acidification Science Task Force (AB 2139) and
the other creating an Ocean Acidification and Hypoxia
Reduction Program (SB 1363).82
The Ocean Acidification and Hypoxia Science Task Force
is an interdisciplinary team of scientists from West
Coast institutions that is tasked with ensuring that the
state’s OA and Hypoxia Reduction Program is based on
the best available science. In 2018 an Ocean Acidification
Action Plan was adopted, outlining a 10-year vision for
addressing ocean acidification in California’s waters and
a series of pragmatic actions to work toward that vision.83
Implementation priorities for the next five years include
developing a monitoring system with publicly accessible
data; mitigating CO2 emissions and reducing nutrient
pollution that can exacerbate OA locally; and mitigating
aquatic CO2 by preserving seagrass meadows, salt
marshes, and kelp forests.
California’s work on OA and hypoxia has been facilitated
and strengthened by the Pacific Coast Collaborative, a
network of West Coast governance jurisdictions that are
working together to build a low-carbon economy. As an
early member of its West Coast OAH Monitoring Network,
California has contributed to and benefited from its
system-wide assessment and design of monitoring assets.
Similarly, California was a co-founding member of the
International Alliance to Combat Ocean Acidification.
This global alliance of more than 70 members shares
information on local actions that can be taken to reduce
the threat of ocean acidification to industry and the
environment.
Key Elements of Success
n	 Regional collaboration, particularly a network that
provides leadership, support, shared resources, and
data collaboration and ensures that solutions are
broadly effective
n	 Ongoing funding to support scientific research and
plan implementation
n	 Communicating—to legislators, state agencies,
ocean users, and the public—the negative effects of
acidification on state tourism and shellfish economies.
In 2007 the U.S. West Coast shellfish industry noticed a dramatic increase in oyster larva mortality
in commercial hatcheries. The shellfish growers joined forces with government and academic
scientists and determined that the larval die-offs occurred when the seawater flowing into
aquaculture facilities had low pH and carbonate availability, indicating that ocean acidification was
the culprit.77 This was later verified with meticulous collaborative research. 
California’s fishery resources are heavily influenced by the dynamics of the California
Current, which is believed to be changing as the result of climate change and ocean
acidification. Scientists have observed and predict a continuation of warmer summer
temperatures, altered patterns of upwelling, more frequent heat waves, more frequent
episodes of low-oxygen and lower-pH waters, and an increase in harmful algal blooms
in the California Current and other eastern boundary upwelling systems.84 California fishermen are
increasingly affected by these changes, as illustrated by recent closures in the Dungeness crab fishery
due to harmful algal blooms.
ADAPTATION
ADAPTING FISHERIES MANAGEMENT TO THE EFFECTS OF
CLIMATE CHANGE
The Climate Adaptation Strategy mandated by former
governor Arnold Schwarzenegger in 2008 tasked the
Coastal and Ocean Resources Working Group—comprised
of senior staff from different agencies with marine and
coastal resource management responsibilities—to identify
management strategies that could address changing ocean
conditions, including potential alternative approaches
to fisheries management dependent upon temperature
regimes, protections for stressed species, or changes to
fishing practices under low pH conditions.85
In 2017, in response to growing concerns about the
increasingly dramatic effects of climate change on marine
ecosystems, the state assembled an expert scientific
panel, a working group of the Ocean Protection Council
Scientific Advisory Team (OPC-SAT), to examine what
steps were needed to ready California’s fisheries for
climate change.86 The panel’s findings were used by the
California Department of Fish and Wildlife to inform
the Marine Life Management Act Master Plan revision.
Several report recommendations were adopted in the
amended Master Plan, including routinely addressing
potential climate impacts in fishery management plans,
conducting vulnerability assessments for affected fisheries
and coastal communities, and increasing the use of
management strategy evaluation in fisheries management
to explicitly account for growing uncertainties.
Although the plan adopted recommendations from OPC’s
report, the state still needs to develop strategies and
actions to implement them. This means California will
need the best available scientific information and tools to
create, improve, and enforce fishery management across
the state.
Key Elements of Success
n	 Regional academic and government experts to engage
in forward thinking about traditional fisheries
management practices
n	 Routine review of the state’s fisheries policy
implementation to incorporate new solutions to
the growing impacts of climate change.
To combat ocean-climate impacts, California is reducing greenhouse gas emissions,
building resiliency, and planning ahead for unavoidable consequences. The state’s climate
programs and policies have been holistically successful, not only safeguarding the
environment but also bolstering the overall economy, enriching communities, improving
public health, and creating jobs.
CONCLUSION
© Richard Wong/Alamy
These accomplishments were built on a strong foundation
of science, with state leadership and investment, and
alongside partners who shared the goal of continuously
learning, improving, and sharing information to meet the
unprecedented challenge of climate change. California
continues to expand and develop programs on the oceanclimate nexus.
Jurisdictions that are—or will soon be—facing ocean
climate-driven impacts could learn from California’s
example, using lessons gleaned from the state’s
experiences as a starting point to address those
challenges. This Ocean-Climate Guide to Action offers
suggestions for beginning or augmenting this process.
We hope it inspires further conversation and collaboration
to protect the oceans that ultimately sustain us all.
For more information or additional references about
solutions included in this guide, contact:
Lisa Suatoni, NRDC, lsuatoni@nrdc.org or Anna Zivian,
Ocean Conservancy, azivian@oceanconservancy.org.