

Monday, March 31, 2014

Financial Times (FT.com) • 575 words

UN study says climate change
already hitting food supply

By Pilita Clark in London



The most comprehensive study in seven years of the effect of climate change has found an ill-prepared world is already suffering from effects evident across the oceans and on all continents, including lands growing crucial food crops.

The most notable effects have been on the natural environment, according to the 30-chapter report by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, the world's most authoritative climate body. These include the extinction of a small number of species, the acidification of the oceans and melting glaciers.

However, in a departure from its last major assessment in 2007, the IPPC makes the striking finding that global warming is affecting two of the world's most important food crops and may be linked to food price rises.

"Climate change has negatively affected wheat and maize yields for many regions and in the global aggregate," according to a 48-page summary of the report, which was finalised by its authors and government officials in the Japanese city of Yokohama over the weekend.

Since 2007, it adds, "several periods of rapid food and cereal price increases following climate extremes in key producing regions indicate a sensitivity of current markets to climate extremes, among other factors".

"This is a radically different picture of how climate change is impacting food production, compared with what was in the 2007 report," said Tim Gore, head of policy for food and climate change for aid agency Oxfam.

"In its previous report, the IPCC was sanguine about how climate change is hitting harvests. This report is categorical that climate change has already meant significant declines in net global yields of staple crops like wheat and maize."




The effects of climate change on two other crucial foods, rice and soybeans, have been smaller in the most important producing countries, the IPCC says, and there may be some positive effects on crops in cooler climates in future.

However, the outlook for wheat, rice and maize production in tropical and temperate regions is expected to be more negative than positive.

This is the second of three major reports the IPCC is releasing, following one in September on the science of climate change, which found that humans were extremely likely to be the main reason global average temperatures have risen since the middle of the last century.

A third study will be released in April on ways of stopping the climate from changing.

Much of the report on impacts published on Monday lists gloomy findings about the potential disruption to all forms of life in a warming world, from advancing spring times that could affect animals' food supplies, to water scarcity, power interruptions and heatwaves that could make human life far more miserable.

A few possible benefits of climate change are mentioned, such as higher crop yields in cooler regions and better fish catches in some places as marine species move from warming waters. Deaths related to extreme cold weather may also decrease.

But these benefits are substantially outweighed by the many downsides identified in the report, which has taken 309 researchers from 70 countries some four years to complete.

&lt;&gt; Chris Field, the US scientist who co-chaired the study's working group of researchers, said the findings reflected the reality of an issue that was not necessarily the "downer" it was often perceived to be.

"It is true that we couldn't find very many benefits of climate change," he told reporters before the report's release on Monday. "I believe that's because there aren't that many. We worked really, really hard to identify every benefit we could find."

But this did not mean there were not a large range of important opportunities ahead as governments and businesses worked to adapt to a changing climate, he said.

"Climate change is a really challenging set of issues, there are lots of things to be concerned about," he said. "But I really feel like one of the things that's made it so difficult for individuals and countries to be serious about climate is that the agenda is such a downer.

"I think the opportunities for dealing with climate are really exciting."

