  Friday, January 10, 2014 
 Financial Times (FT.com) • 304 words
  Earthlings, engage rationally with climate change

  Rational engagement would consider there to be a risk that human-caused climate change is real (whether at the IPCC's "95 per cent certain" level or not); that, if real, it would flood coastal areas, displace many millions of people and cause hardships greater than most wars; that once it happened, the carbon-dioxide levels causing it would take hundreds of years to reverse; that any reaction will take many decades (development of new technologies and introduction of these to our capital stock of buildings, vehicles and machines), and that we should therefore start now to work on the Plan B of a carbon-free economy.  Most people are fierce in defence of their children and grandchildren from potential risks to their wellbeing. Climate change, if it happened, would be among the greatest of these risks.  Mr Caldwell's article is a vivid illustration of how far removed the debate still is from a truly neutral pursuit of our own and our children's welfare.  James Denman, Berlin, Germany  From Mr James Denman.  Sir, Christopher Caldwell's article "A cruise that will cost the climate campaign dear" (January 4) is a telling comment on the climate debate just not in the way that he intends it. A ship getting stuck in ice has little bearing on the question of whether an entire planet is warming and what we should do about it that much should deserve no further debate.  Rather, the jeering tone of climate change sceptics he reports on and echoes in his writing goes to the heart of the issue. A Martian would be fascinated by the extent to which emotion and prior belief dominate the climate change discussion (on both sides, but more prominently on the sceptic side): "Why do these Earthlings, faced with a potentially existential question, spend so little time rationally engaging with it and so much time lining up in two opposing groups and loudly echoing the views of the others in their group? Don't they care about the risk it might be real?"  Rational engagement would start with reading the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's Summary for Policymakers (27 pages at www.ipcc.ch, which take a lot less time to read than many who have not read them spend pronouncing on them) and with a coolheaded search for objective and nonpartisan opinion beyond this.   