 News, Saturday, November 14, 2020 645 mots, p. 2

Super-rich start prepping to escape emerging health threats

Climate change
HANNAH KUCHLER — NEW YORK

Wealthy individuals and concerned businesses are preparing to protect themselves from climate change and any new health emergency by tapping an increasingly bespoke range of personal services and snapping up private hideaways that are out of reach for ordinary citizens.

The deadly wildfires that have ravaged the US west coast and the prospect of a new disease outbreak that could outlast Covid-19 has spurred interest in a range of expensive concierge medical services, specialist real estate agents and crisis experts including Global Rescue, an evacuation response company.

Dan Richards, its chief executive, said he had signed up more clients in the past five months than in the company's 16-year history. He had been asked to draw up plans to transfer hundreds or even thousands of employees from cities should fires or civil unrest break out. "They've got real risks and real hazards that 10 years ago weren't even on their radar," he said. "We've been engaged more frequently to do things that I honestly have never contemplated."

The destruction in California, caused by rising temperatures and lower rainfall, is among the most palpable signs of how climate change is impacting people's lives. The World Health Organization forecasts climate change will between 2030 and 2050 cause 250,000 additional deaths a year, including from heat stress and infectious diseases.

Elena Villalobos, at the WHO climate change and health programme, said the divide was not just between developed and developing countries, but between rich and poor in the same country.

While the poor lack the resources to flee or protect themselves, the rich are starting to take action.

High-end medical practices are creating personal preventive strategies for clients, from surveying homes to ensure they are sealed from smoke to monitoring their vital signs with wearables. Some refer clients to dermatologists for the effect of heat on skin, and therapists for the anxiety produced by disasters.

"Climate change is to the forefront of people's minds right now," said Abe Malkin, medical director at ConciergeMD. Legacy Partners, which sells properties in New Zealand for a global clientele looking to escape, said it had received interest from US customers concerned about wildfires, and wealthy clients struggling with smog that affects many Asian cities. "We're doing all of these things to help, whether it's to protect themselves or enhance their life, to give them longevity," said Jim Rohrstaff, a partner at the company.

Some are thinking even more radically and approaching companies offering climate-controlled bunkers, such as the Vivos. Dante Vicino, executive director, said its complex of almost 600 ex-military bunkers in the Black Hills of South Dakota had been fitted with air filters "on steroids" — which were put to the test when fires burnt in nearby Wyoming. "Outside, man, you could smell the smoke," he said. "But people inside their bunkers said they couldn't tell."

The vast majority who are unable to afford such services, however, must stay and suffer the consequences.

Abdul El-Sayed, an epidemiologist and former health commissioner of the city of Detroit, said there needed to be investment to prepare everyone for the public health effects of climate change.

"When rich people exit a system, it's because it's not working for everybody. It's just that everyone else doesn't have the means to exit the system," he said.

Lisa Patel, a paediatrician at a neonatal unit in the San Francisco Bay Area, fears climate change is already taking a toll on children and expectant mothers. A study in Colorado found wildfire smoke increased the likelihood of premature birth and low birth weight. "You have these premature babies who are born with premature lungs ... Now on top of it, they are breathing this toxic pollution," she said. "This is our collective failure to prevent the effects of climate change."
