 Business, Monday, September 28, 2020 1131 mots, p. 4

Business

'You can't run a business on a dead planet, right?'

Change isn't just cosmetic, believes Natura chief Roberto Marques - companies have to address the climate crisis, he tells Laura Onita
Laura Onita

Roberto Marques' life could have been starkly different. He had been composing his own songs and playing bossa nova in nightclubs in his native Brazil when he landed a marketing internship at Johnson & Johnson, the world's biggest drugs company. Shortly after, the twenty-something professional hung up his guitar to climb the corporate ladder.

"At one point I couldn't cope with both so I decided to stay with one," says Marques, who spent more than 25 years at J&J in several executive roles.

He now runs Natura & Co, the parent company of the eponymous brand as well as Aesop, Avon and The Body Shop.

The beauty group, the fourth-largest player in the world, purports to be the friendly face of capitalism thanks to its strong sustainability credentials and pledges to help tackle the climate crisis. It made R$14.4bn (£2bn) in sales last year. "We truly believe companies should serve a higher purpose, create positive impact and be a force for good," Marques says without blinking over a video call from his home just outside New York. "That's the only way we can operate, because to some extent, that's how we were formed."

Natura started life in 1969 when Luiz Seabra and Pedro Passos opened a small beauty shop on an affluent street in São Paulo. A decade later, friend Guilherme Leal joined them after he lost his job, with money he had from the sale of a plot of land.

The brand's reputation has been partly built on its ecological credentials and its commitment to protect the Amazon region.

The three founders are co-chairmen and controlling shareholders of Natura, with a 42pc stake. The firm has a dual listing on the São Paulo and New York stock exchanges. They tapped Marques for a board role five years ago and he was subsequently put in charge of an expansion plan that led Natura to snap up The Body Shop in 2017 for $1.2bn (£940m) and Avon in January for $2bn, after it bought Australianfounded Aesop in 2013 for $71m. He is executive chairman and also holds the title of chief executive since closing the deal with Avon - a move that goes against corporate governance norms in the UK, but is relatively common elsewhere.

Marques says Natura has a balanced corporate governance - "probably one of the best in class" - and together with the founders they call the shots.

"The group firmly believes in the power of the collective. It's not about one individual making all the decisions. My role is to be an enabler."

All four brands subscribe to the trio's credo that there has to be more to a conglomerate than just profits and fat returns for shareholders.

"Some people ask me, 'but have you guys had any difficulty sometimes making those trade-offs, when you have those conversations with the board?'," says Marques. "I always say ...

'We've been doing business this way since those [four] brands were created'.

"I think people are starting to realise that, you know, you can't run a business on a dead planet, right? So if you think about the longevity of a business in a sustainable way, you absolutely need to pay attention to what's happening in terms of the climate crisis, inequality and social injustice."

Until now, few businesses have been taking climate change seriously. The pandemic has arguably given firms an opportunity to press the reset button after economies came to a halt and harmful emissions fell sharply as a result. The increasing demands of consumers and customers will play a part, too, thinks Marques, and ever more stringent laws driven by governments.

"The younger generation is much more aware of this notion that everything is somehow interconnected. The pressure is coming from all angles, you know, and I think this is a positive thing."

Marques does not rule out more acquisitions, but he says that Natura's hands are full with the integration of Avon. Critics of the deal have argued that buying the cosmetics brand, which sells directly to consumers worldwide, often in person, was an expensive gamble at a time when debt has soared. Total net debt went from R$5.7bn to R$10.6bn over the past two years at the group.

Marques dismisses suggestions that the pandemic may have rendered Avon's business model obsolete. "What people haven't realised is that [direct selling] has evolved to online, which we call social selling. So all those entrepreneurs, are now leveraging their social media platforms, through Facebook, Twitter, WhatsApp and Instagram, to sell and not having to do it physically."

In the most recent quarter, e-commerce sales for the group rose by 225pc.

Marques, one of four siblings, was born and raised in São Paulo. His father died when he and his brothers were very young, meaning he "started to work very early" to help the family.

He also taught himself how to play guitar growing up. "I don't play anymore at all. A lot of people asked me why I was so radical to walk away from that. I used to play eight hours a day, for me that was my life."

But when he landed the J&J job Marques decided to channel that same energy towards his marketing career. He left Brazil 20 years ago when he had to move to the Colombian city of Cali with his family to run a part of J&J's business there. He then relocated to the US and a string of senior global roles followed.

Natura came knocking to ask him to join the board as a director and he then rose to executive chairman.

His parents instilled his "value-driven" modus operandi since he was little, he says, which is why Natura is a good fit. "It was a company that I always admired, especially as a Brazilian, and it was always a competitor when I was working at J&J. It was an easy decision," he says.

Marques' minder intervenes to say we have run out of time. He is due to speak at a Climate Week summit that afternoon to debate how society moves forward in a postpandemic world.

CV ? Age: 56 ? Education: Degree in business administration, Getúlio Vargas Foundation in São Paulo; postgraduate at the Kellogg School of Management, Northwestern University, and Wharton School, University of Pennsylvania ? Family: Married with three daughters ?Big break: Becoming a company president at Johnson & Johnson for one of its divisions, at the age of 30
