Climate Point: President-elect Biden sets tone for direction on the environment

Mark Olalde | USA TODAY
Welcome to Climate Point, your weekly guide to climate, energy and environment news from around the Golden State and the country. In Palm Springs, Calif., I'm Mark Olalde.
Will the federal government finally buckle down and pass a 13-digit COVID-19 relief bill that's also mixed with an energy-focused federal spending bill? It's tough to tell with President Donald Trump seemingly torpedoing the process at the 11th hour in the midst of fighting over individual relief checks.
That's where we stand as I'm writing this, at least, but if the huge spending measure does pass, it'll have wide-ranging implications for energy and the environment, E&E reports. Among other things, it would extend renewable energy tax credits, carbon capture incentives and building efficiency tax breaks.
On that note, Smart Cities Dive reports that a new study by the Rocky Mountain Institute and Bloomberg Philanthropies outlines how "green cities" would be the logical way to build back after the pandemic. If we're going to kickstart things with a massive cash infusion, why not spend it on an accelerated transition to zero emission transportation, retrofitting schools and affordable housing with smarter tech and retiring coal power by investing in additional renewables, they ponder.
Here's some other important reporting....
MUST-READ STORIES
Culture change. Debra Utacia Krol of The Arizona Republic is out with a new, fascinating look at the cultural implications of climate change for the Southwest's Indigenous communities. As environments shift and temperatures rise -- as well as generations lose interest -- it's becoming more difficult to carry on traditions. "Native artists, cultural practitioners and artisans are experiencing more difficulty locating plants like willow, devil's claw, arrowweed or other materials they need for artistic and cultural continuance," she reports.
Saving the swamps. To date, $5 billion has been poured into the restoration of the Everglades since then-President Bill Clinton signed a law calling for its protection in 2000. What have we accomplished so far? Unfortunately, not as much as we'd like, the Fort Myers News-Press reports. Only one of 68 related projects have been completed


there. "That's not to say the federal-state Comprehensive Everglades Restoration Plan is faltering, but it does illustrate the staggering challenge of such an undertaking," Amy Bennett Williams writes.
End of an era. Back in the Copper State, The Arizona Republic reports that three huge emissions stacks at the Navajo Generating Station, an iconic coal-fired power plant, came down the other day, signaling the sunset of an era. While the event itself was in many ways purely symbolic, Ryan Randazzo writes that the "demolition of the largest coal burner in the West is a milestone for environmentalists who fought, and continue to fight, to shift the country to renewable energy."
POLITICAL CLIMATE -- SELECTION WEEK!
With John Kerry previously announced as President-elect Joe Biden's international climate envoy, there were still numerous key environmental posts to be filled, which resulted in heavy lobbying from politicos and wild guessing from pundits. Most of those spots have now been filled by a group of individuals that the Natural Resources Defense Council has labeled "an environmental A-Team destined to make historic progress in fighting climate change and protecting public health." Here's where we landed on some key environmental posts.
U.S. Department of the Interior. After intense political pushing and shoving in the nation's capital, Rep. Deb Haaland, D-N.M., has been chosen to be the first Native American Secretary of the Interior. From the Pueblos of Laguna and Jemez, Haaland is a supporter of the Green New Deal, and her selection marks a massive about-face for an agency that once played a role in the genocide of Indigenous people. Indian Country Today has the story.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency. Over at the EPA, Michael Regan, North Carolina's chief environmental regulator, is Biden's choice. Regan would be only the second Black administrator of the EPA, and he has bona fides from fighting to clean up coal ash. Politico has the story.
Department of Energy and climate czar. Former Michigan Gov. Jennifer Granholm will be the nominee to helm the U.S. Department of Energy, while Gina McCarthy, a former head of the EPA and current Natural Resources Defense Council CEO, will act as Biden's climate czar. The Detroit Free Press has the story.
EXTREME EXTRACTIVES
When the black gold's not worth the green. In the first federal drilling auction in California since 2012, the government scored fewer than $50,000 from oil and gas companies. In exchange, they handed over drilling leases covering 4,100 acres, Reuters reports.
Outlawing protest. As climate change looms, should it be illegal to protest against new fossil fuel infrastructure? Several states have said "yes" over the past few years, and HuffPost reports that Ohio is ready to be the latest. A bill to "escalate criminal charges on


fossil fuel protesters and threaten religious organizations or nonprofits that support such demonstrations with crushing fines" faced large opposition in the past, but recently, the Legislature approved it on the last day of the session. The governor is expected to receive it before the end of the calendar year. Whose land is it? In an intriguing legal battle, Native American tribes in Oklahoma are asserting their right to govern oil and gas extraction on land that's legally theirs, something the state's Corporation Commission and private businesses are unsurprisingly fighting against. The Oklahoman reports that the state's top court will review the commission's decision to deny tribes that regulatory power.
AND ANOTHER THING
Diagnosis a dying lake. Glimmering in the Southern California desert, the Salton Sea is the state's largest lake. It's also a growing -- or shrinking, depending how you look at it -- environmental and public health catastrophe, as the shoreline recedes, exposing pesticide-laden dust that winds blow across the region. This week, I partnered with photographer Mette Lampcov for a story co-published by The Desert Sun and High Country News. We dug into the question of why we've known about this issue for decades, yet so little has been done, even though roughly $70 million has gone to fix it. Scientists agree that to maintain a livable planet, we need to reduce the atmospheric carbon dioxide concentration back to 350 ppm. We're above that and rising dangerously. Here are the latest numbers: That's all for now. Don't forget to follow along on Twitter at @MarkOlalde. You can also reach me at molalde@gannett.com. You can sign up to get Climate Point in your inbox for free here. And, if you'd like to receive a daily round-up of California news (also for free!), you can sign up for USA Today's In California newsletter here. Mask up! Cheers.


