Climate crisis 'likely cause' of early cherry blossom in
Japan



30 mars 2021

Japan’s famous cherry blossoms have reached their flowery peak in many places earlier
this year than at any time since formal records began nearly 70 years ago, with experts
saying the climate crisis is the likely cause.

Referred to in Japan as sakura, the blossoms used to reach their peak in April, coinciding
with the start of the new school and business year. Yet the blooms have been creeping
earlier, and now most years the flowers are largely gone before the first day of school.

This year, peak bloom was reached on 26 March in the ancient capital of Kyoto, the
earliest since the Japan Meteorological Agency started collecting the data in 1953 and 10
days ahead of the 30-year average. Similar records were set this year in more than a dozen
cities across Japan.

Crowds of people enjoy the cherry blossom in Tokyo. Photograph: Eugene Hoshiko/AP

Some say it is the earliest peak bloom ever, based on records from historic documents,
diaries and poetry books from Kyoto. Osaka Prefecture University environmental scientist
Yasuyuki Aono, who tracks such documents, said the earliest blooms he has found before
this year were on 27 March in the years 1612, 1409 and 1236, although there are not
records for some years.

“We can say it’s most likely because of the impact of the global warming,” said Shunji
Anbe, an official at the observations division at the Japan Meteorological Agency.

The agency tracks 58 “benchmark” cherry trees across the country, and this year 40 of
those already have reached their peak bloom and 14 have done so in record time. The
trees normally bloom for about two weeks each year from first bud to all the blossoms
falling off.

Peak bloom in Inokashira Park, Tokyo. Photograph: Philip Fong/AFP/Getty Images

Cherry trees are sensitive to temperature changes and the timing of their blooming can
provide valuable data for climate change studies, Anbe says.

According to the agency data, the average temperature for March in Kyoto has climbed to
10.6C (51.1F) in 2020 from 8.6C in 1953. So far this year’s average March temperature in
Japan has been 12.4C.

Sakura have deeply influenced Japanese culture for centuries and regularly been used in
poetry and literature, with their fragility seen as a symbol of life, death and rebirth.



 

 




