

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
National, Wednesday, March 3, 2021 1327 mots, p. A 12

In Swift Actions Focused on Climate, Interior Department
Reverses Trump Policies

By Lisa Friedman

Representative Deb Haaland of New Mexico, Mr. Biden's nominee to lead the department, faces a showdown
vote in the Senate likely later this month, amid vocal Republican concern for her past positions against oil
and gas drilling. But even without her, an agency that spent much of the past four years opening vast swaths
of land to commercial exploitation has pulled an abrupt about-face.

The department has suspended lease sales in the Gulf of Mexico under an early executive order imposing a
temporary freeze on new drilling leases on all public lands and waters and requiring a review of the leasing
program. It has frozen drilling activity in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, delayed Trump-era rollbacks on
protections of migratory birds and the northern spotted owl, and taken the ﬁrst steps in restoring two
national monuments in Utah and one off the Atlantic coast that Mr. Trump largely dismantled.

As early as this week, one administration ofﬁcial said the Interior Department is poised to take the next steps
in preparing a review of the federal oil and gas leasing program.

Even critics of the administration's agenda said they have been surprised by the pace of the agency's actions.

"They're obviously moving forward quickly and aggressively," said Nicolas Loris, an economist who focuses on
environment policy at the conservative Heritage Foundation.

That aggressiveness, along with Ms. Haaland's long history of pushing to shut down fossil fuel drilling and
pipelines, has put the agency in the line of ﬁre from Republicans and the oil and gas industry.

"I almost feel like your nomination is sort of this proxy ﬁght over the future of fossil fuels," Senator Maria
Cantwell, Democrat of Washington, told Ms. Haaland during her conﬁrmation hearing last week.

The Environmental Protection Agency will ultimately take center stage in the regulatory battles over climate
change because it is the lead agency policing emissions from the electricity and transportation sectors -- the
two largest sources of greenhouse gas emissions in the United States.

But the Interior Department, which decides when and whether to sell publicly owned coal, oil and gas, is at
the heart of the always contentious ﬁght over keeping such resources "in the ground" -- that is, whether the
vast   majority   of   America's   fossil   fuels   should   remain   untapped   to   avoid   dangerous   concentrations   of
greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

Mr.   Biden   already   has   appointed   nearly   50   top   Interior   ofﬁcials   across   the   vast   agency,   many   of   them
veterans of the Obama administration, adept at pulling the levers of policy. They include Kate Kelly, who
spent six years at the Interior Department before going to the liberal Center for American Progress where
she focused on public lands policy, and Laura Daniel Davis who served as chief of staff to former secretaries
Sally Jewell and Ken Salazar. This time around, she is a principal deputy assistant secretary over land and
minerals management.

Perhaps   the   most   signiﬁcant   driver   of   the   agency's   most   aggressive   early   action,   supporters   of   the
administration said, has been David Hayes, who served in both the Obama and Clinton administrations as
deputy secretary of Interior. Mr. Hayes worked on Mr. Biden's transition and ahead of Inauguration Day was
tapped to be a special adviser to the president on climate change policy.

"These are people who know how to get things done," said Sarah Greenberger, interim chief conservation
ofﬁcer at the National Audubon Society.

The appointments have had immediate effects. The day after Mr. Biden named a new offshore energy
regulator at the Bureau of Ocean Energy Management, for example, the ofﬁce revived the review of an

 





offshore wind farm near Martha's Vineyard that the Trump administration had moved to cancel.


Ms.   Greenberger   noted   that   actions   like   suspending   the   Trump-era   rule   that   gutted   protections   for
migratory birds required particularly fast planning since the Biden administration had only a short window
to act before the rule was set to take effect, on Feb. 8. Similarly when an Alaska Native group missed a
deadline to conduct a seismic survey in the Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, the department moved to
effectively kill the survey.

"There was an enormous amount of thought put in during the transition, especially into understanding what
needed to happen and what were the opportunities," Ms. Greenberg said.

Critics took a dimmer view.

"Makes you wonder if they're treating the new secretary as a ﬁgurehead and the deputies are going forward
with what they had planned regardless," said Kathleen Sgamma, president of the Western Energy Alliance, a
Denver-based oil and natural gas association.

In a statement Jennifer Van der Heide, chief of staff at the Department of Interior, said those already in place
at the agency are working to implement Mr. Biden's campaign promises until Ms. Haaland is conﬁrmed.

"There are some actions we can or must move quickly on, but when we have a secretary, she will provide the
leadership, experience and vision to restore morale within the department, build a clean energy economy,
strengthen the nation-to-nation relationships with tribes, and inspire a movement to better conserve our
nation's lands, waters, and wildlife," Ms. Van der Heide said.

The   Interior   Department   manages   about   500   million   acres   of   public   lands   and   vast   coastal   waters.   Its
agencies lease many of those acres for oil and gas drilling as well as wind and solar farms. It oversees the
country's   national   parks   and   wildlife   refuges,   protects   threatened   and   endangered   species,   reclaims
abandoned mine sites, oversees the government's relationship with the nation's 574 federally recognized
tribes, and provides scientiﬁc data about the effects of climate change.

That sprawling range of authorities has allowed Interior to move more quickly than smaller agencies that rely
more on the slow churn of regulations, experts noted. Interior has initiated consultations with tribal leaders
to hear their suggestions on federal policies and reversed restrictions that Mr. Trump's Interior secretary,
David Bernhardt, had imposed on the Land and Water Conservation Fund, which prevented money from
being used to buy public land.

But some major actions -- such as an expected revision of the Endangered Species Act, which Mr. Trump's
administration curtailed through regulation -- must await a Senate-conﬁrmed secretary.

Mr. Biden's Interior Department will ultimately be deﬁned by its reversals on fossil fuels after four years in
which the Trump administration aggressively pursued energy production on public lands.

At Ms. Haaland's conﬁrmation hearing Senator John Barrasso, Republican of Wyoming, noted that she has
advocated for keeping fossil fuels "in the ground." He pressed her on where oil and gas workers in his state
and others that depend on drilling will work if Mr. Biden's drilling pause becomes permanent.

Ms. Haaland sought to reassure Republicans that she would enact Mr. Biden's policies of pausing future
fracking, not banning it. In fact, Mr. Biden's position is not far from Ms. Haaland's. He campaigned on a
promise of "banning new oil and gas permitting on public lands and waters," and it remains unclear for now
whether the Biden administration will move forward with a permanent moratorium.

Ms. Sgamma, whose group has ﬁled a lawsuit challenging Mr. Biden's executive order, said she believes the
administration's review of the leasing program is actually designed to drag on for the duration of Mr. Biden's
term.

"In the meantime, we will expect no leasing and a slowdown in other permitted activity. That's why this is not
a pause' on leasing," she said, adding, "Whether you call it a 'pause' or a yearslong ban, it is unlawful and I like
our chances in court."

Drew Caputo, vice president of litigation at EarthJustice, an environmental group, said he hopes the early
pause will be a down payment on Mr. Biden's campaign pledge.

"The climate crisis and the biodiversity crisis isn't standing still," he said.



 


