

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Tuesday, March 30, 2021 498 mots, p. 3

Electric tanks on the charge as they go to war on climate
change

By Danielle Sheridan DEFENCE CORRESPONDENT

ELECTRIC tanks and vegetarian options in the mess are just some of the ways the military plans to go
greener, the Ministry of Defence has revealed.

The MoD sets out in a report how it will respond to "the threat posed by climate change",   after   it   was
instructed to invest in environmentally friendly ways of operating.

It was published in response to an internal Climate Change and Sustainability review conducted by Lt Gen
Richard Nugee last year.

Lt Gen Nugee, who advises the MoD on making areas of defence more sustainable, told The Daily Telegraph
that one major factor under consideration was how renewable energy could replace fossil fuels.

He said that while it was not possible to turn the UK's Challenger 2 main battle tanks electric, there was a
"distinct possibility" that in the next "10 to 15 years" 20-ton, uncrewed tanks could operate with renewable
energy.

Lt Gen Nugee said that in such a scenario "that makes it possible... to be propelled by a green energy
solution".

"Not all our vehicles are going to be susceptible to this, but what we should be doing is looking for the
mindset and the opportunity to develop different types of vehicles which are susceptible to renewable
energy over time," he said.

Lt Gen Nugee added that troops were being educated about the beneﬁts of vegetarianism for both a
healthy life style and the planet.

He said that they would look to educate the three services "that eating less meat is a good idea", adding that
they would also "produce menus in our messes and so on that might offer more alternatives to meat".

In the foreword of the report, Jeremy Quin, Minister for Defence Procure ment, said the department was
"determined to play our full part in helping the government address climate change head on and achieve
our legal commitment of net zero by 2050".

Mr Quin said: "The very scale of what Defence is called upon to do makes us a carbon-emitter. However, we
recognise both the necessity and opportunity to build on our existing successes in cutting carbon and
mitigating Defence's impact on the environment."

Defence, which accounts for 50 per cent of the UK Government's emissions, will also look to rewild parts of
land   with   "no-mow"   trials   to   see   how   it   can   encourage   pollination   and   enhance   biodiversity.   After   a
successful trial at Westdown Camp on Salisbury Plain where a "nomow" trial encouraged wild herbs, ﬂowers
and shrubs to grow, work is under way to roll the initiative out across the Defence estate.

Lt Gen Nugee added: "The reality is that we own a signiﬁcant chunk of the UK's land mass and I believe have
a responsibility to look after that land mass as best we possibly can to try and increase biodiversity and
improve environmental sustainability on it."


