 News, Thursday, August 27, 2020 770 mots, p. 4

Business

Mooted UK trade role for Australia's former PM is latest shot in the post-Brexit culture war

If true, Abbott seems an odd choice given his views on climate change and gender, says Lizzy Burden
says Lizzy Burden

If former Australian prime minister Tony Abbott is to be appointed joint president of the Board of Trade, it would make "about as much sense as Australia asking Gavin Williamson to run its education system".

That's according to Mike Rann, who was Australian high commissioner to the UK when Abbott was in office from 2013 to 2015.

The Department of International Trade (DIT) batted away speculation linking Abbott to the role, which The Sun reports he would share with the Liz Truss, the Trade Secretary.

DIT claims no decision has been made on the appointment, but according to The Sydney Morning Herald, Abbott had breakfast with Truss in London yesterday, having been granted an exemption from the Australian government's travel ban.

Scott Morrison, the current Australian premier, appeared to confirm the story, telling the Australian TV network ABC: "Well done Boris! Good hire!" But other sources say Abbott would hypothetically be no more than an adviser.

If it goes ahead, London-born Abbott's mooted arrival is a blatant shot fired in the post-Brexit culture war.

Against a backdrop of accusations the Government has a "woman problem", Abbott is an ostensibly odd choice as a sidekick to Truss, who is also Minister for Women and Equalities and former environment secretary, given his views on gender and climate change.

A trained priest, Abbott once urged support for one of his female Liberal party candidates because she had "a bit of sex appeal", was publicly accused of sexism by Julia Gillard as Australian prime minister in 2012 after a string of comments he made about her being childless and unmarried, and, when he took over from Gillard, appointed himself as women's minister. He has referred to the "so-called settled science" on climate change, an upgrade from his view of it as "absolutely crap" in 2009, and in a speech in London, credited global warming with "probably doing good".

None the less, Abbott can be relied upon to fly the flag for Brexit, of which he has been a vocal champion. After Parliament rejected Theresa May's Brexit withdrawal plan last year, Abbott tweeted: "What's wrong with no deal? Australia does $100bn a year in trade with the EU without a deal."

That stirred Dmitry Grozoubinski, former Australian trade negotiator at the World Trade Organisation during the Abbott government, to describe him as "embarrassing". There can be little doubt No 10 is revelling in trade experts' outrage at rumours of the appointment. Many were already miffed at being purged from Government's trade advisory committees.

Emily Thornberry, the shadow trade secretary, said she was "disgusted that Boris Johnson thinks this offensive, leering, cantankerous, climate changedenying, Trump-worshipping misogynist is the right person to represent our country overseas".

"He was ousted by his own colleagues after two years in power, and kicked out of Australian politics by his own constituents just last year," she added. "They are the people who know him best, and they wanted rid of him - yet here we are, hiring him to negotiate our trade deals around the world. If it wasn't so downright humiliating, it would be almost hilarious."

The Board of Trade has existed in various guises since the early 17th century when it was established to advise on matters colonial, under its formal title "The Lords of the Committee of the Privy Council appointed for the consideration of all matters relating to Trade and Foreign Plantations". Whether as an adviser or co-president, Abbott would be unlikely to be directly involved with negotiating trade deals. His role may be more ambassadorial, promoting "Global Britain" internationally, or perhaps more regionally focused, chairing quarterly meetings of the Board of Trade's advisers. However, since its relaunch in 2017, the Board has met only seven times and not since May last year, in locations around the UK, most recently Belfast.

DIT's in-tray is certainly full. Talks with Canada are expected to start imminently, a deal with Japan - at least in principle - is Truss's goal by the end of the month, and a second round of talks with Australia will start next month, while negotiations with the US and New Zealand rumble on.

Regardless of whether Abbott can help to push the deals over the line, the Government stirring rumours about his appointment is more likely for the benefit of onlookers at home.

'What's wrong with no deal? Australia does $100bn a year in trade with the EU without a deal'
