The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)Monday, March 13, 2017, p. 5Big oil embraces 'green' carbon capture technologyThe fossil fuel industry has become an unlikely ally of environmentalists in the push for new ways to reduce their emissionsBy Ambrose Evans-Pritchard in HoustonTHE world's fossil fuel industry has become the most ardent defender of carbon capture, joining environmentalists in an unholy alliance to push for radical changes in public policy to kick-start the technology.Leaders of the big oil, gas, and coal companies lined up at the IHS CERAWeek summit in Houston, pledging a muscular drive to slash the costs of extracting CO2 from hydrocarbon energy. The goal is some sort of "Manhattan Project" breakthrough to safeguard the long-term survival of their companies. "We can't just keep our heads in the sand," said Bob Dudley from BP.Contrary to widespread belief, the top executives are going out of their way to praise the findings of the United Nation's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)."I have read all the IPCC reports. We understand the risks associated with fossil fuels, and we think we can help mitigate those risks through technology," said Darren Woods, the new chief of ExxonMobil.Few believe that the United States will withdraw from the Paris climate agreement under President Donald Trump - despite his rhetoric - or that his election will stop the global push for tighter controls on greenhouse gas emissions in the 2020s and beyond. The historic forces are too powerful.Rex Tillerson, the US Secretary of State, has warned that it would be fatal for American credibility to pull out of the accord. Ivanka Trump is trying to persuade her father to let the matter drop quietly.The fear in Houston is that hardening public attitudes and rising penalties on carbon will drive much of the fossil fuel industry out of business unless it can come up with viable forms of carbon capture and storage (CCS). If they fail to take the lead in time, some rival technology may beat them to it and catapult renewables into irreversible dominance.Mr Woods said ExxonMobil is involved in a quarter of all the CCS projects in the world, and is working on new chemicals that can lower emissions rather then relying on the primitive bolt-on CCS technologies mostly in use today, which gobble up a fifth of the power as "parasitic load".It has launched a joint venture with FuelCell Energy exploring whether carbonate fuel cells can capture 90pc of CO2 gasses cheaply and at scale before they are emitted. ExxonMobil backs a carbon tax.This is the new orthodoxy of an industry under huge pressure from sovereign wealth funds, pension funds, and activist shareholders to adapt."We believe in the science of climate change, and it changes the way we invest. We are reducing our own emissions, and we are investing in commercial scale CCS," said Steve Pastor, head of BHP Billiton's operations in the US, where the company has major oil and gas assets.Shell and BP are funding advanced research on CCS at Imperial College London through the Oil and Gas Climate Initiative, a $1bn (£821m) scheme backed by Europe's leading energy groups.Ben van Beurden, Shell's chief executive, warned that the political backlash in the advanced democracies poses an existential danger to the fossil fuel companies unless they get ahead of public opinion on global warming. "Social acceptance is just disappearing. I do think trust has been eroded to the point that it is becoming a serious issue for our long-term future," he said in Houston.Carbon capture is not new. Drillers use CO2 on a commercial basis, pumping it into depleted wells for enhanced oil recovery. The gas sells at $15 (£12) a tonne at current crude prices, but would be worth nearer $40 (£33) in a fresh oil boom. It is used in a host of processes from fertilisers, or the treatment of alkaline waste water, to dry cleaning and decaffeinated coffee.Utility-scale CCS has so far proved too expensive. Southern Co's project at a Mississippi coal plant in Kemper has been a sorry saga, running $4bn (£3.29bn) over budget and two years late. It will capture just 65pc of the emissions.The UK is better placed than almost any other country to take the lead on CCS since it has storage sites in the North Sea and a nexus of pipelines already in place. Yet the Government abandoned Britain's £1bn prize for twin projects in Scotland and North Yorkshire in 2105, citing budget costs.While the abrupt decision caused uproar at the time, it may prove fortuitous if cheaper technologies emerge. "The most elegant solution is to disassemble the carbon molecule itself. We are not there yet," said Lord Browne of Madingley, former BP chief and now a champion of green energy causes.NetPower is building a remarkable pilot project on the Texas Gulf coast, with Exelon and Toshiba, based on the Allam cycle. Designed by British inventor Rodney Allam, it relies on supercritical oxy-combustion that captures CO2 as part of the process - along with others gases - at zero net cost."We can help the world meet climate targets without paying a penny more in electricity costs. All we are is a gas turbine inside a steam process. It's really very simple. People think the story must be too good to be true," said NetPower founder Bill Brown.Mr Brown is off to Saudi Arabia and the Gulf states next week, at their invitation. Saudi Aramco already has a cutting-edge CCS venture at its Hawiyah natural gas plant. Its EXPECAdvanced Research Center is scouring the world for the latest ideas."The problem is that reducing CO2 emissions from fossil fuels has not had policy parity," said Charles McConnell, former assistant US energy secretary under President Obama. "It has no institutional shield of approval. The administration I used to work for said it was a subsidy for the oil and gas industry, if you can believe it."Mr McConnell, now head of Rice University's Energy and Environment Initiative, said investment in CCS would take off if it was put on a level playing field with renewables like wind and solar. He insists that there is no plausible alternative."Energy demand is going to double by 2050 and the reality is that most of this will come from fossil fuels."We'll need carbon capture if we are ever going to do anything serious about climate change. The world cannot afford to get this wrong," he said.'We understand the risks associated with fossil fuels. We can help mitigate those risks through technology'