 NATIONAL NEWS, Thursday, April 15, 2010 392 mots, p. 4

Global warming graph attacked by study
By Fiona Harvey, Environment Correspondent

'Hockey stick'

A key piece of evidence in climate change science was slammed as "exaggerated" yesterday by the UK's leading statistician, in a vindication of claims that global warming sceptics have been making for years.

Professor David Hand, president of the Royal Statistical Society, said that a graph shaped like an ice hockey stick that has been used to represent the recent rise in global temperatures had been compiled using "inappropriate" methods.

"It used a particular statistical technique that exaggerated the effect [of recent warming]," he said.

The criticism came as part of a report published yesterday that found the scientists behind the "Climategate" e-mail scandal had behaved "honestly and fairly" and showed "no evidence of any deliberate scientific malpractice".

The e-mails were hacked last autumn from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia. They caused a storm, as they appeared to show scientists manipulating and concealing data.

Although yesterday's report - commissioned by UEA with advice from the Royal Society, the UK's prestigious national science academy - exonerated the unit's scientists, it criticised climate experts for failures in handling statistics.

"It is very surprising that research in an area that depends so heavily on statistical methods has not been carried out in close collaboration with professional statisticians," the report concluded.

The hockey stick graph was a key part of the scandal. In the e-mails, UEA's Professor Phil Jones referred to a "trick" to "hide the decline" in temperatures suggested by certain sources of data. A similar trick was used in the hockey stick graph.

The UEA scientists said that "trick" merely referred to a scientific technique - an explanation accepted by some sceptics, including Lord Lawson, former Tory chancellor.

Prof Hand said his criticisms should not be seen as invalidating climate science. He pointed out that although the hockey stick graph - which dates from a study led by US climate scientist Michael Mann in 1998 - exaggerates some effects, the underlying data show a clear warming signal.

He accused sceptics of "identifying a few particular issues and blowing them up" to distort the true picture. The handful of errors found so far, including the exaggerated hockey stick graph and a mistaken claim by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change that Himalayan glaciers would disappear by 2035, were "isolated incidents", he said. "If you look at any area of science, you would be able to find odd examples like this. It doesn't detract from the vast bulk of the conclusions," he said.

The report into the science produced by UEA, which came from a panel chaired by Lord Oxburgh, a scientist and former Shell chairman, was the second investigation into Climategate in the UK. The first, by a committee of MPs, also found the scientists innocent of manipulating data, though it said they may have breached Freedom of Information legislation.

An investigation into the scientists' handling of FOI requests is still under way.
