The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, August 11, 2010DISASTERS 'PROVE THAT GLOBAL WARMING IS HAPPENING'Louise Gray Environment CorrespondentTHE simultaneous catastrophes of flooding in Pakistan, wildfires in Russia and landslides in China are evidence that global warming predictions are correct, according to climate change experts.They said the "extreme weather events" of recent months were all "unprecedented" and that such disasters, taken together, were proof of climate change.Scientists also warned that widespread and devastating flooding would become more frequent and could be considered normal by the middle of the century.Almost 14million people have been affected by the torrential rains in Pakistan, and 1,600 have died, making it a greater humanitarian disaster than the South Asian tsunami and recent earthquakes in Kashmir and Haiti combined, the United Nations said.In Russia, firefighters and soldiers were yesterday battling to stop wildfires from engulfing key nuclear sites, while Prime Minister Vladimir Putin took to the air in a waterbombing plane to join the effort. Morgues in Moscow are overflowing as officials estimate 5,000 people have died in the worst heat wave in 130 years.Flooding in China has killed more than 1,100 people this year and caused tens of billions of dollars in damage across 28 provinces. Flash floods in France and Eastern Europe have killed more than 30 people over the summer.Jean-Pascal van Ypersele, vice-president of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), the body set up by the UN to monitor global warming, said the "dramatic" weather patterns were consistent with changes in the climate caused by mankind."These are events which reproduce and intensify in a climate disturbed by greenhouse gas pollution," he said. "Extreme events are one of the ways in which climatic changes become dramatically visible."Meteorologists said the disasters in Russia, Pakistan and China had all been driven by a "supercharged jet stream". The jet stream, a vast ring of high-speed winds, had split in two with one section heading north over Russia and the other going south over the Himalayas into Pakistan. In Russia, the stream was inhaling the heat and spreading it quickly, causing fires. However, in Pakistan it was "supercharging" the monsoon. Dr Peter Stott, head of climate monitoring at the Met Office, said there was "clear evidence" of a rise in the frequency of extreme weather events due to climate change."The odds of such extreme events are rapidly shortening, and they could become considered the norm by the middle of this century," he said. Prof Andrew Watson, of the University of East Anglia, said the extreme events were "fairly consistent with the IPCC reports and what 99 per cent of the scientists believe to be happening".Breakaway ice island visible from spaceA satellite picture shows an ice island that has broken off the Petermann Glacier in northern Greenland. Scientists said the floating ice sheet, which broke away on Thursday, covered 100 square miles -- two thirds the size of the Isle of Wight.Force of nature Climate catastrophes around the worldChina At least 702 people have died in north-western Gansu province since the weekend, when torrents of mud and rocks engulfed the town of Zhouqu. More than 1,000 are missing. A year of flooding has already killed more than 1,100 people.Pakistan The UN said on Monday that the Pakistan flooding was the greatest humanitarian crisis in recent history, with more people affected than the 2004 Asian tsunami and the recent earthquakes in Kashmir and Haiti combined. More than 1,600 have been killed, while almost 14million have been affected and need aid.Central Europe At least 11 killed by flooding this week, with many homes left ruined. Flooding in May and June killed 18 in Poland. Others died in the Czech Republic.Kashmir Hundreds still missing in Indian Himalayas after flash floods hit remote Ladakh, killing at least 177.Russia Heatwave estimated to have cost almost 5,000 lives. All exports of wheat and other grain halted after bulk of harvest wiped out by fires.Australia Coldest June in nearly 30 years in Sydney. Temperatures hit 39F (4C).