Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, October 23, 2010WILL THE LIGHTS GO OUT?Gordon MacKerronThe future is electric. But how will the power be generated? This, the fourth of eight monthly pages resulting from a partnership between The Daily Telegraph and Shell, examines the issue, identified by a panel of leading experts as one of the principal energy challenges facing Britain. Energy and Climate Change Secretary Chris Huhne is closely following the debate, which readers can join online - see below for detailsEnergy policy decisions are complex and difficult Objectives are wide-ranging - security, efficiency, affordability, environmental protection (including climate change) - and they are not always mutually consistent Among these objectives, security especially worries politicians. The last Prime Minister declared in 2008 that security was an "imperative", a core state responsibility that the present government endorses. Among security issues, the threat that the lights might (literally) go out especially haunts policy makers.The starting point is a comb ination of unrelated circumstances due to bite in the middle of this decade. The first is that all our nuclear stations but one will need to close before 2020, a non-negotiable position because of safety concerns.Second, a new and more stringent EU Large Combustion Plant Directive (LCPD) on emissions from generating plant comes into effect in 2015 and this will, if implemented fully, cause the closedown of 8,000 megawatts of otherwise serviceable coal-fired plant. Some easing of the problem might be expected to come from reductions in electricity demand. After all, the Government is pursuing a Green New Deal designed to cut domestic energy use. But even if this new deal is rapidly and widely implemented, this will not help much.As argued by the authoritative Committee on Climate Change, there is a powerful policy need for a large growth in electricity use, for example in transport and in heating, even while total energy demand is expected to fall. This need for rapid growth in electricity use is a consequence of the UK's ambitious commitments to climate change targets, which can best be kick-started through major expansion in low-carbon electricity generation (renewable energy and nuclear power). Needs for growth in electricity capacity and to shut down large quantities of plant leaves a large apparent "gap" from 2015 onwards.So how might we fill this gap? Renewable energy and nuclear power are being pursued vigorously but they cannot collectively fill the gap by 2015. Renewables are growing fast but from a very low base, and there will be no power from the first new nuclear station until 2018. Hence the fear of the lights going out sounds serious.In reality, the gap is unlikely to materialise. There is a large stock of gas-fired power projects waiting, ready to go at short notice, and each capable of being built in two years. Fears around further gas import dependence are also exaggerated given the diversity of gas sources and the recent expansion of US supplies from shale.There is also a willingness in the policy system to contemplate major reform to the wholesale electricity market and this could be adapted to incentivise building of gas-fired capacity, should market signals prove insufficiently strong. And if all these mechanisms are not enough and a gap really did loom, then we can rely on the European Commission to allow postponement of the application of the LCPD. So the lights can and almost certainly will stay on, but there is a further twist and a real policy dilemma.The likely need for a large quantity of new gas-fired plant from mid-decade, with a lifetime of 30 years, means that the rate at which our electricity system can be decarbonised will be reduced, impacting on climate change strategy. The pat answer to this is to say mat new gasfired capacity will have carbon capture and storage technology fitted later. But there are two snags here. Carbon capture and storage is yet to be demonstrated at full scale; and business may be hesitant to bring forward its pipeline of gas-fired projects if it fears that their later profitability might be jeopardised by a retrospective need to fit carbon capture. So there is a potentially stark choice for the Coalition: guarantee security by allowing new, gas-fired power, or stick to climate change strategy and take more risks with security. When Gordon Brown said security was an "imperative", he labelled climate change strategy as a "challenge". Governments can afford to fail on challenges but they cannot fail to deliver on imperatives.The big issue about security is therefore not whether or not the lights can be kept on; it is whether, in keeping the lights on, the UK finds creative ways to maintain the climate change commitments that the Coalition seems serious about meeting. Gas for low-carbon electricity Natural gas can be an affordable source of low-cost, low-carbon electricity for the UK in both the short- and long-term. In the next 10 vital years the cheapest, fastest, most significant way to reduce COz emissions is for new gas-fired power stations to replace old coal-fired plants.Longer term, combining natural gas and carbon capture and storage technology (CCS) offers a low-cost way to secure, low-carbon electricity. This has been demonstrated in a recent cost comparison study. For natural gas and CCS to realise their full potential, we need government support for CCS demonstration, a carbon price and effective carbon markets. So, in the UK a substantial gas capacity with CCS can take its place alongside nuclear and new wind in a well diversified future energy supply mix. James Smith Chairman, Shell UK'Governments can afford to fail on challenges but they cannot fail to deliver on imperatives'