Telegraph (London, UK) Monday, December 13, 2010CLIMATE CHANGE BACK FROM THE BRINKGeoffrey Lean reportsLife is unexpectedly starting to surge back into the world's moribund bid to avert runaway global warming, after the surprising success of the latest climate summit in this Mexican seaside resort at the weekend. At the last minute, the conference, for which the highest hopes had been merely that it should avoid failure, produced the biggest breakthrough in over a decade.The breakthrough - which Britain and the Prime Minister did much to bring about - came amid unprecedented scenes of enthusiasm and emotion in the early hours of Saturday morning, when tears flowed and thunderous ovations from almost all the representatives of the 194 nations gathered in the resort's sprawling Moon Palace hotel complex drowned out the last resistance from Left-wing Latin American states.Less than 24 hours earlier the talks had been deadlocked. And for most of the preceding two weeks of talks the belief had grown that the 20-year-old, frequently sclerotic United Nations negotiations simply could not produce the kind of complex and far-reaching agreement needed to combat climate change.Many warned that failure here, following the deeply disappointing result of last year's Copenhagen summit, would cause much of the world to give up on the process, casting doubt over the entire future of multilateral negotiations. Indeed, that very prospect - together with savvy, skilful chairmanship by the Mexican government - did more than anything to haul delegates back from the abyss and vindicate those, in Britain and abroad, who insisted that the international system could deliver after all.The outcome, though it falls well short of what will be needed to avert dangerous climate change and will have to be confirmed and adopted at a future summit, is, as ministers pointed out yesterday, the most significant since the Kyoto Protocol was agreed 13 years ago, and is much more wide ranging. It calls for "deep cuts" in emissions, enshrining for the first time in a UN agreement that temperatures should be prevented from rising more than two degrees centigrade above preindustrial levels, and formalises reduction targets pledged by developing and industrialised nations alike. And it adds a broad list of other measures, including establishing a Green Climate Fund to help poor countries tackle global warming and a scheme for compensating countries that desist from felling their forests."This is way beyond what we were expecting," said Climate Secretary Chris Huhne, fortified by the three cans of Red Bull that had got him through the all-night session. "It is a really important moment, a turning point in the long-running saga of international climate change negotiations."Difficult as they were, though, the talks took place in a more constructive, problem-solving atmosphere than anyone could remember as delegates recoiled from the acrimonious ambience of Copenhagen. Most remarkably, there was an unanticipated outbreak of amity between the United States and China, whose clashes lay at the heart of the denouement in the Danish capital.Just a few weeks ago, the two carbon superpowers were still in combat, each trying to ensure the other was blamed for a breakdown. But here they rapidly reduced the differences between them; and others of last year's vociferous proponents also quietened down. As Elliot Diringer, of the Washington-based Pew Centre on Global Climate Change, put it: "Everyone was a bit more comfortable seeing the two big elephants in the room playing nicely with each other."But trouble promptly arose from an unexpected quarter. Japan, which normally takes a low profile in international negotiations, announced that it would not "on any conditions or under any circumstances" accept new targets for emission reductions under the Kyoto Protocol when the existing ones end next year. The undiplomatic unconditionality of the statement seemed designed to kill the treaty before any new one could be in place, and was bound to inflame Third World countries for whom the protocol has totemic importance.Developed and developing nations have long differed over extending the treaty, which applies only to industrialised countries - it was the main cause of conflict in Copenhagen - and the summit organisers had planned to postpone discussion until next year's meeting while seeking agreement on less contentious issues. Japan's move prevented this and threatened to destroy the whole negotiating process. Huhne was asked to intervene.Day after day, he and Izabella Teixeira, the Brazilian environment minister, co-chaired delicate talks to try to find a solution, which repeatedly only narrowly avoided breakdown. "It was a bit like that film Sliding Doors," Huhne says. "There were three or four occasions when you realised that, if we made it on to the carriage, we had a chance of happy ending and, if not, disaster would ensue."Part of the problem was that the Japanese government appeared naively to have been persuaded by big business at home that it would get international credit for killing Kyoto and allowing a new "negotiating paradigm" somehow to emerge - whereas, in fact, it was courting condemnation to eclipse the obloquy it attracts for its whaling. At one stage, Huhne, a former journalist, warned its delegates from his 19 years' experience in the profession that they inevitably would be blamed if the talks broke down. David Cameron phoned his Japanese counterpart, Naoto Kan, and eventually a form of words was found that allowed the issue to be parked.It almost didn't happen because, just at the most crucial moment, it seemed Huhne would have to fly home for the tuition-fees vote. The ticket booked, he was ready to go when Cameron and Nick Clegg decided that his work here was so important they would risk it without him.While all this was going on, progress on almost every other issue was becoming deadlocked.Finally, Patricia Espinosa, the Mexican foreign minister who chaired the conference, took the extraordinary step of calling meetings, open to all delegations, to try to find compromises. Astonishingly, under her leadership some 50 nations managed to hammer out a draft agreement that went further in tackling climate change than anyone thought possible.Die-hard sceptics were suddenly left relying on Cuba, Hugo Chavez's Venezuela and Evo Morales's Bolivia to block the breakthrough. The Left-wing alliance had been enough to deliver the coup de grace in Copenhagen, but this time only Bolivia withstood the tumultuous applause that greeted appeals from almost every other country to close the deal, and eventually Espinosa gavelled down its objections.Most of the credit for the summit's success rests with her and the Mexican government's inclusive, flexible and open approach: they seemed to have studied the Danes' disastrous conduct of Copenhagen so as to do the precise opposite. Britain, which has spent years working with the Mexicans on the issue through its embassy, can also be well satisfied. But both also benefited from delegates' desperation to avoid the whole process collapsing, partly for the sake of the planet but partly too because their own jobs were at stake."Confidence has returned," says Calderon, and already previously dubious possibilities are opening up. Europe is now much more likely to increase its emission reductions, provoking others to follow suit. And developing countries like India are hinting, for the first time, that they, too, could accept legally binding targets.Such progress is urgently needed, but there will need to be very much more - and further breakthroughs - before there is a new treaty strong enough to save the climate. At least there is now a chance that it may eventually come about.