

Thursday, December 17, 2015

Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 22 • 666 words

Paris talks usher in a more active
climate for institutional investors

By John Authers

Whether or not the COP21 Paris conference saves the planet, it appears to have marked a turning point for institutional investment. There are at least two important legacies. First, from now on co-operation between activist investors will be the norm. Allowing activists to gang up on corporate targets is a contentious idea. But institutions should have changed that in Paris.

Big European investors formed the Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change, with nearly €13tn in assets between them, and peppered negotiators with proposals. It worked with several non-governmental organisations. As Stephanie Pfeifer , IIGCC chief executive put it, coordination on environmental issues is critical and it works.

Second, the notion of investors' fiduciary responsibility has changed and is unlikely to change back. The science of climate change is controversial in the US, but the need for investors to take into account climate risks, not just financial risks, is accepted. Companies with a poor environmental record are a good bet to underperform in future.

In part this reflects a broader and more ambitious view of the role of a big investment fund. The phrase "universal owner" is becoming common. The biggest pensions and endowments hold swaths of the equity market, and hence own the negative externalities created by stocks in their portfolio that affect others.

They also have a holistic duty to ensure a good retirement for their members - which arguably includes making sure they have a healthy planet on which to live. Ambitious pension and sovereign wealth funds see themselves as guardians of all their members' interests.

From this follows a new phrase in the lexicon: "active ownership". Unlike traditional ethical investing, which does not own the stock of problem companies, or hedge fund activism, which involves aggressive campaigns to improve returns for shareholders, active ownership attempts to reform companies' behaviour on ESG - environmental, social and governance - issues.

Preliminary academic evidence in a paper called "Active Ownership ", by Elroy Dimson of the University of Cambridge and London Business School, Oguzhan Karakas of Boston College, and Xi Li of Temple University, suggests that it works. They had access to a database kept by an (unnamed) US asset manager from 1999 to 2009, during which it practised active ownership. Crucially, this listed both standard corporate governance campaigns - aimed at improving issues such as board structure - and more ambitious campaigns on environmental and social issues that did not have a direct financial impact.

It listed when the campaigns started and gave a "milestone" that the asset manager hoped would be reached, along with information on whether this had been reached.

The strategy worked well. On average environmental and social engagements gained 2.3 per cent above the market, even though the great majority of them were unsuccessful. Successful engagements gained 7.1 per cent, although they tended to flatten once the milestone had been reached. Failed campaigns moved with the market.

Collaboration boosted the chances of success greatly. In environmental and social cases, asset managers that ganged together had a success rate of 47.8 per cent (or 36.5 per cent when they collaborated with NGOs), compared with 13 per cent for all their comparable campaigns. There was also evidence of greater success when the manager came back for a second or third campaign.

The academics found that targets tended to have poor corporate governance, which could get in the way of implementing projects that help their ESG scores, and were concerned about their reputation.

Many successful investment strategies carry the seeds of their own demise, because they attack market efficiencies and make them go away. But this evidence suggests that there have been rich pickings so far, and that the returns in terms of the externalities of universal owners' portfolios could be great.

Companies should get used to the notion that big institutions are going to gang up together to force them to sort out their environmental act.

