

Thursday, December 31, 2015

Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 4 • 835 words

Voters' views on global warming
pose test for US presidential
hopefuls

Climate change



Global warming or hot air? Democratic politicians say climate change is a grave threat to the US. Their Republican counterparts accuse them of alarmism over a non-issue. A close study of public opinion suggests neither stance chimes with a majority of Americans.

Voters are best described as worried but unwilling. They are more concerned about climate change than most Republican politicians, but less willing than Democrats to back potentially pricey measures to curb it.

That creates a test for presidential candidates in 2016.

Barry Rabe, a public policy professor at the University of Michigan who has done extensive analysis of opinion polls, says: "All the evidence suggests there is growing concern about this issue, but limited evidence that that translates to any groundswell of support for any particular policy, especially one that imposes costs."

Here are six key messages from the polls:

A clear majority of Americans say climate change is real

Seven in 10 Americans say there is solid evidence of global warming - an assertion that is still challenged by many Republicans, even though scientists say it is beyond dispute . The proportion of people who believe in warming has, however, been unusually volatile, according to the University of Michigan, and Mr Rabe says opinion is easily influenced by events. A campaign against President Barack Obama's proposed cap-and-trade system for carbon dioxide emissions helped push belief in global warming down to 58 per cent in 2010. More recently, belief has rebounded as more people cite the evidence of weather patterns. Pope Francis's call for climate action also made a difference, says Mr Rabe.

Conservative Republicans stand apart from the mainstream

Political partisanship has a big influence on voter attitudes towards climate change. But the dividing line does not run between the two parties, as often presumed. Conservative Republicans - who have an outsized influence in primary elections - are the only group in which a majority (56 per cent) say there is no solid evidence of a rise in the earth's temperature, according to the Pew Research Center. The views of moderate Republicans are similar to those of moderate Democrats. Tony Leiserowitz, director of the Yale Project on Climate Change Communication, says this could create some rare middle ground for policymakers to exploit.

Americans are more concerned than the Chinese

Americans care more about climate change than their Chinese peers, according to Pew. Forty-five per cent of Americans say climate change is a "very serious" concern - below the global average, but above the 18 per cent who rated it as such in China.

Before this month's Paris climate change summit, 62 per cent of Americans said it was at least moderately important that the world reached an agreement to limit global warming, according to Yale polling. Seventy-four per cent wanted emerging economies such as China and India to do more.

But US voters say climate change is less important than other issues

Climate change appears to be a far less urgent issue for Americans when they are asked to rate its importance alongside others. In a Fox News poll in November only 3 per cent of people named it as the most important issue facing the country. Terrorism came out top, chosen by 24 per cent of people who were polled in the days after the Paris terror attacks. In the summer the same pollster found the economy and jobs mattered most, picked by 30 per cent of respondents. Climate change then got 5 per cent of the votes. Such findings have emboldened Republican politicians to dismiss calls for climate action.

Climate change is not even the biggest environmental problem

In a Gallup poll, 32 per cent of Americans said they worried a "great deal" about climate change. But more fretted about the loss of tropical forests and species extinction - and the greatest concerns were water and air pollution.

Americans like a variety of climate-friendly policies, but are not willing to pay much for climate action

Viewed in isolation, Americans support a number of energy policies designed to combat climate change. Among those covered by a Yale survey, the most popular with Democrats and independent voters was funding for renewable energy research . Even Republicans liked the idea, but their favourite policy was expanding offshore drilling for oil and gas, which is not seen as climate-friendly.

Yet cost is a nagging concern. Polling by Harvard and the Massachusetts Institute of Technology shows people are not willing to pay much more on their monthly electricity bill to solve global warming. The average acceptable increase was about $12 in 2013.

A hypothetical $12 per month from every household could enable any number of climate policies, but experts say it would probably not be enough money to make a serious difference. Republicans are seeking to use voters' cost concerns to score points against Hillary Clinton, the Democratic presidential frontrunner, arguing her favoured policies would raise utility bills too high and hurt the economy.
