

Monday, December 14, 2015

Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 2 • 806 words

Teeth of accord lies in emissions
scrutiny

CLIMATE TALKS

By Pilita Clark in Paris

Monitoring system should make it easier to see how countries curb
their pollution


The fact that it took the world's governments so many sleepless nights of intense haggling to seal the Paris climate accord on Saturday night is in many ways baffling.

The 12-page pact will be legally binding for the countries that go on to sign it and is the first new global climate deal in 18 years. But it only requires countries to "communicate and maintain" plans to cut greenhouse gas emissions, as opposed to meeting any targets in those plans. And the system to make sure governments comply with its provisions is to be explicitly "non-adversarial and non-punitive".

The deal pays lip service to the idea of a global carbon price and lays out ground rules that could help link up existing emissions trading schemes, but it does not require an international price to be set.

Nor does it say fast-growing emissions from airlines, or ships must be cut, despite EU efforts to insert a clause aimed at reaching such a goal. It sets a goal for countries to collectively keep global temperature rises to "well below" 2C from pre-industrial times and "pursue efforts" to keep warming below 1.5C, suggesting carbon dioxide pollution from burning fossil fuels that cannot be absorbed by natural carbon "sinks", such as forests, or carbon-capturing technology, should be phased out in the second half of the century.

But these are only goals. The teeth in the accord, to the extent there are any, instead are the obligation it places on all countries - rich and poor - to resubmit their voluntary emissions-cutting commitments every five years, probably from 2020, and to do so in a way that has never been done before. At present, there is a two-tiered UN system of rules for reporting and checking up on countries' volume of emissions. It is much stricter for developed countries than those the UN classed as developing in 1992. The latter group includes China, whose 27 per cent share of global carbon dioxide emissions dwarfs that of the US (15 per cent) and EU (10) combined.

The agreement establishes a new, more common reporting and monitoring system that should make it easier to see how much all countries are emitting and what they are doing to curb their pollution. This may be more significant than it first appears. The last legally binding global climate accord, the 1997 Kyoto protocol, only obliged a few wealthy countries accounting for a small share of global emissions to meet pollution reduction targets, and failed to stop emissions rising.

The Paris agreement may not require countries to meet targets (few would have agreed to it if it had) but it does oblige all nations to at least subject their plans to scrutiny every five years in a far more transparent manner than most have ever done before. In return, developing countries wanted the pact to oblige wealthy states to deliver at least the $100bn a year by 2020 they had already promised to help poor ones cope with global warming, and larger amounts in later years.

The US and most other developed countries balked at including this sum in the Paris agreement itself. But the pact does commit them to provide more climate finance to poorer nations and an adjoining decision of the Paris meeting says they should set a goal of more than $100bn a year by 2025.

France's president François Hollande offered a taste of what could lie ahead on Saturday night when he announced he would revise his country's existing carbon reduction targets before 2020 and invited other nations to join him.

His did not find many immediate takers. Even the US, one of the countries that pushed hardest for the Paris agreement, seemed to be caught off guard by Mr Hollande's commitment. "It's certainly a bold and welcome action by President Hollande," said a senior US administration official on Saturday night. But US President Barack Obama had been working "flat out" to meet its existing carbon reduction goals, he said, adding: "I wouldn't expect those targets to be revised."

The accord will be open for signature from April next year and will only enter force once at least 55 countries accounting for at least 55 per cent of global emissions have approved or ratified it.

US Republican Party lawmakers have vowed to block the first tranche of the $3bn of climate finance the Obama administration offered ahead of the Paris meeting, unless it abandons plans to wave through the accord by executive agreement, and submits it to a hostile Senate for consent. With the US producing about 15 per cent of the world's carbon emissions, the Paris agreement is likely to proceed more smoothly if such legislators do not prevail.
