The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, December 1, 2015, p. 16We have no more climate excuses, Cameron warns Paris summitBy Henry Samuel in Paris and Emily GosdenWORLD leaders will have no excuses if they fail to reach an agreement to tackle climate change, David Cameron warned yesterday.The Prime Minister painted an apocalyptic vision of the Earth's plight as he joined almost 150 leaders in Paris for the start of a UN climate conference, described by organisers as the largest gathering of heads of state the world has known.Held just two weeks after the terrorist attacks in Paris that killed 130, the summit saw leader after leader issue their condolences to the French people and underline their solidarity in turning up to the huge event, with Barack Obama calling it an "act of defiance" against terrorism.Over the next fortnight negotiators aim to thrash out an agreement governing how they will reduce greenhouse gas emissions in the 2020s, with a long-term goal of preventing global temperatures rising 2C beyond pre-industrial levels. Above that level, scientists say, the world will experience the most extreme effects of climate change.Deep divisions remain between the countries over the different responsibilities that developed and developing countries should shoulder, with negotiators only just beginning to hone down a vast draft agreement. Speaking during the latter stages of an exhausting series of speeches by world leaders, from China's Xi Jinping and Russia's Vladimir Putin to the heads of tiny island nations that are in danger of vanishing beneath rising seas, Mr Cameron said all parties knew what a "good deal" looked like and insisted an agreement was "not difficult, it is do-able"."Let's just imagine for a moment what we would have to say to our grandchildren if we failed. We would have to say, it was all too difficult," he said. "They would reply, 'What was it that was so difficult when the Earth was in peril?'" Mr Cameron said a deal must have a "binding legal mechanism" and include a "five-year review so we can see how we are doing" against the targets, fi-nancial support for the poorest and most vulnerable countries, and mechanisms to measure and verify progress. He also used the summit to push his renegotiation of Britain's membership of the EU, holding meetings with Jean-Claude Juncker, the European Commission president, Matteo Renzi, the Italian prime minister, and Antonio Costa, the Portuguese prime minister.Earlier, the Prince of Wales issued an impassioned plea for action, warning that "in damaging our climate we are becoming the architects of our own destruction", while President Obama warned the world had almost run out of time to tackle the problem.Narendra Modi, India's prime minister, gave a hint of the rows to come as he used his speech to insist that rich nations must make the deepest cuts."It is not just a question of historical responsibility, they also have the most room to make the cuts and make the strongest impact. And climate justice demands that with the little carbon space we still have, developing countries have enough room to grow," he said.Amid the torrent of words, those from tiny nations at the front line of climate change were the most poignant. Christopher Loeak, prime minister of the Marshall Islands, said: "Everything I know, and everyone I love, is in the hands of those of us gathered here today."