National, Thursday, May 20, 2010, p. A 19U.S. Science Body Urges Action on ClimateBy JOHN M. BRODER; Leslie Kaufman contributed reporting from New York.WASHINGTON -- In its most comprehensive study so far, the nation's leading scientific body declared on Wednesday that   is a reality and is driven mostly by human activity, chiefly the burning of fossil fuels and deforestation.The group, the National Research Council, an arm of the National Academy of Sciences, issued three reports describing the case for a harmful human influence on the global climate as overwhelming and arguing for strong immediate action to limit emissions of climate-altering gases in the United States and around the world -- including the creation of a carbon pricing system.Congress requested the reports in 2008. This is the first time the academy has issued specific recommendations on how to mitigate or adapt to climate change.One of the reports, "Limiting the Magnitude of Future Climate Change," urges the United States to set a greenhouse gas emissions "budget" that restricts overall emissions and provides a measurable goal for policy makers and for industry. It does not recommend a specific target but says the range put forward by the Obama administration and Congress is a "reasonable goal."Legislation pending in Congress calls for reducing greenhouse gas emissions by about 17 percent from 2005 levels by 2020.The report says the most efficient way to reduce carbon dioxide emissions is to set a predictable and rising price. It does not explicitly recommend a cap-and-trade system, but says that such a system of tradable emissions permits would give industry more flexibility in meeting an emissions target or budget.Another report, "Adapting to the Impacts of Climate Change," suggests that the United States and other nations begin planning for effects like rising sea levels and more severe storms and droughts. Increasing preparedness can be viewed as "an insurance policy against an uncertain future," the report said, while inaction could impose large costs on future generations."These reports show that the state of climate-change science is strong," Ralph J. Cicerone, president of the National Academy of Sciences, said in a statement accompanying the reports. "But the nation also needs the scientific community to expand upon its understanding of why climate change is happening and focus also on when and where the most severe impacts will occur and what we can do to respond."John P. Holdren, the science adviser to the Obama administration, was briefed on the report Tuesday night, researchers said.The academy recommends that an interagency group be given the authority and the resources to coordinate national research and response. It notes that previous efforts have fallen short of providing the kind of action-oriented research that policy makers need.Predictably, advocates of climate and energy legislation embraced the reports."These studies clearly demonstrate the urgency for Senate action," said Senator John Kerry, Democrat of Massachusetts and a sponsor of a climate bill introduced in the Senate this month.Peter Frumhoff, director of science and policy for the Union of Concerned Scientists said: "This report should light a fire under Congress. Lawmakers should stop dragging their feet, pay attention to the science and pass a bill this session."