National, Wednesday, November 24, 2010China Sets Tough Line in Climate TalksBy IAN JOHNSONBEIJING -- Senior Chinese officials said on Tuesday that next week's climate talks in Cancun, Mexico, would succeed only if the West agreed to transfer technology to developing countries like China and to take the lead in cutting emissions.The comments by one of China's senior officials in charge of climate issues, Xie Zhenhua of the powerful National Development and Reform Commission, were mirrored by two other senior Chinese climate officials who earlier this week published a report saying China was willing to make concessions -- if developed nations put money into a $30 billion fund aimed at helping poor nations cope with global warming.Western countries pledged to set up such a fund but details have yet to be worked out. Mr. Xie said it would be the key to securing a deal to the 1997 Kyoto treaty, which is due to expire in 2012.The positions reflect a long-standing view by developing countries, led by China, that they are largely not responsible for   -- which they say was caused by decades of western pollution -- and thus should not play a leading role in reversing it. Stated forcefully by China's chief climate officials, the comments reemphasized the challenge facing negotiators in Cancun as they try to reconcile the positions of the two camps."Developed countries need to take the lead in massively cutting their green house gas emission in order to give further development space to developing countries," Mr. Xie said. "Developing countries in particular should be concerned about achieving tangible results with regard to funding and technology transfer issues."The United States, by contrast, wants developing countries to curb emissions and agree to international verification.Mr. Xie called on developed countries to cut emissions by up to 40 percent and emphasized that China has already made huge strides in cutting pollution, even though its 30-year program of economic reforms have vaulted it to the forefront of industrialized nations. "No single country or single block of countries has achieved that in history," Mr. Xie said. "This is our big contribution to the international community."Despite China's growth, Mr. Xie said it remains a developing country and couldn't be treated like the United States or European countries with respect to climate change. "We will never accept anything beyond our condition as a developing country," he said.Mr. Xie noted that China had made pollution cuts such a priority that some local governments had made last-ditch efforts to meet pollution-reduction targets. This year some factories closed as officials tried to meet targets for reducing China's "energy intensity" -- the amount of power consumer per unit of economic output.