ANNUAL REVIEW 2019 Hwcroeewate change.   Goodbye from our outgoing CEO  "In 2019 the climate movement grew in strength.  An estimated 7 million young people worldwide marched in protest against their governments for continuing to lead us deeper into a climate emergency. There was an upsurge in student-led movements calling for climate action. And the UK parliament declared a national climate emergency, putting even more pressure on politicians to act. Much of this was unimaginable just 12 months ago. At the same time, we continued to witness the human suffering linked to climate breakdown. From Cyclone Idai which hit Mozambique, Zimbabwe and Malawi, leaving over 1,300 people dead, and Hurricane Dorian which tore through the Bahamas causing up to $7 billion worth of damage, to the flooding chaos in the north of England. The signs couldn't be clearer. We can't afford to heat the planet up much more. Scientists say 1.5°C of warming is the limit. We've already hit 1°C. Governments need to take urgent action, but we also need people to work together and make their communities climate friendly. Thanks to your support, we've been able to do just that. In 2019 we launched Climate Action groups, a new network providing communities with local solutions to the climate emergency. In building that network we've grown our supporter base, inspired new audiences and achieved more successes on our campaigns.  Craig Bennett Friends of the Earth Chief Executive It was also the year the UK held yet another General Election. Unlike previous elections, the climate emergency got its very own televised debate where for the first time ever, parties were interrogated solely on their plans for a safer climate. And we launched our Parliamentary Candidate Pledge, asking parliamentary candidates to make climate a dealbreaker when voting in parliament. We secured over 1,000 pledges ­ demonstrating how influential the climate movement has become. I'd like to sign off with a personal thank you to each and every person who has supported our work. After 18 years at Friends of the Earth (and almost 5 years as Chief Executive), I will be leaving the organisation. I'm extremely proud of what Friends of the Earth has achieved during my time as Chief Executive, and it will be enormously hard for me to leave this great organisation, but I'm excited to see Friends of the Earth thrive under new leadership." - Craig Bennett  Speaking of which, in 2019 our fracking campaign celebrated a big victory. The UK government announced to temporarily suspend all fracking activity in England. Our campaigners were instrumental in helping local communities heap the pressure on politicians to reverse fracking. We'll continue to push for a full ban, but it's a great achievement to celebrate.   How we create change We believe that a lack of political will is the main obstacle to reversing climate breakdown and restoring nature. Our approach is to combine evidence-based analysis of environmental problems with mass public pressure on decision-makers in order to drive change. Our grassroots structure ­ made up of local groups and Climate Action groups across England, Wales and Northern Ireland, plus hundreds of thousands of individual supporters ­ helps to make us relevant in communities throughout the country. We're also a member of the biggest global network of grassroots environmental activists ­ Friends of the Earth International. Truly local to global.  Climate Action groups 2019 was the year we launched our Climate Action groups. The network is for anyone who wants to take climate action, not just traditional environmentalists. From April to June 2019 we hosted a UK-wide tour to inspire people to create and join Climate Action groups. The tour ­ featuring workshops and talks on how to tackle climate breakdown ­ was a huge success with 96% of tickets sold. The majority of attendees were "first-timers" to Friends of the Earth. In just 8 months, more than 140 Climate Action groups registered with us. The network is as diverse as it is far reaching, from an interfaith group in Birmingham to a parish council in County Durham and a group in Merton led by a Colombian scientist. The environment may not have been at the heart of why some of these groups formed, but they've joined our network to kick-start climate action in their communities. With our support, they're persuading their councils to adopt an ambitious Climate Action Plan.  Annie Ahmed, new member of Footsteps ­ a Climate Action group based in Birmingham Joanna Judges, healthcare assistant and climate activist  Rhiannon Wood, member of a Southampton-based Climate Action group We are well on course to reach our target of 200 groups by the end of 2020. Gerard Rosenberg, chairman of the Shoreham Society, a Climate Action group based in West Sussex   Climate Action Plan  You may have heard that the government plans to go net zero by 2050. Net zero means only releasing as many carbon emissions as are absorbed. With the state of the climate emergency, 2050 just isn't soon enough.  All our campaigns are working towards achieving net zero as soon as possible, which is where our Climate Action Plan comes in. Over 165,000 people signed our Climate Action Plan petition in 2019. The plan gives us a chance of ending the climate emergency. It spells out the changes the government needs to make across all sectors, from transport, power and buildings to agriculture, consumption and international justice. It includes phasing out fossil fuels like coal, oil and gas ­ moving over to 100% clean energy. The government may have most of the money and power, but councils still need to take urgent action to tackle climate breakdown ­ turning their climate emergency declarations into working solutions. That's why in 2019 we also devised a Climate Action Plan for councils. It's a flexible plan that takes into account the different types of local authorities and the varying functions they have. And it prioritises actions based on impact, affordability and co-benefits. In 2019, Climate Action groups started establishing ties with their councils in a push to adopt these plans. There are already lots of good examples of councils tackling climate chaos ­ from Nottingham using a parking levy to relieve congestion and invest in public transport, to Bristol's urban forest plans and Cambridgeshire's green local energy drive. THE LEGAL TEAM Protest is a powerful way of raising awareness about injustice and helping to create change. We only need to think of Greta Thunberg's student climate strikes. Worryingly then, by the start of 2019, there had been a surge in oil and gas companies using the law to block people protesting peacefully at fracking sites, by taking out anti-protest injunctions. Punishments ranged from fines to imprisonment.We believe these injunctions are an attack on free speech. So when members of the public took petrochemical company Ineos to the Court of Appeal in 2019 over its anti-protest injunction,our legal team stepped in to help ­ and together we won. We went on to successfully challenge UK Oil and Gas's similar injunction, reducing the scope of the injunction and defending the democratic right t o protest.   After years of campaigning, fracking has been suspended in the UK thanks to our work alongside NGOs and local communities. Eight years ago, Friends of the Earth launched a campaign against fracking (a process used to extract shale oil or gas from the ground) in the UK. We joined local communities and other environmental NGOs to raise awareness ­ at local and national level ­ of the dangers. Fracking has a damaging effect on our environment, and there's a wealth of scientific evidence  to support that. Not only are shale oil and gas both fossil fuels (and therefore emit greenhouse gases when burnt), the process of extraction triggers earthquakes. 57 earthquakes alone were detected in Lancashire during a 2-month period in 2018, when the energy company Cuadrilla was fracking at Preston New Road, Lancashire. The British Geological Survey also warned that fracking could lead to contaminating groundwater, a third of which is used to supply our drinking water. Fast forward to the end of 2019, and the UK government finally announced a moratorium on fracking with immediate effect. This is a major win for Friends of the Earth and the communities who fought tirelessly and used all manner  of (peaceful) methods to achieve this goal. The result is a testament to the importance of community-led campaigns in addressing the climate emergency. Whilst we celebrate the significance of this win, Friends of the Earth will continue to campaign for a full ban in the UK, and to end support for fracking overseas. We'll also continue to call on the UK government to accelerate the transition to a zero-carbon economy by ending all support for oil, gas and coal development in the UK and abroad, and instead invest in renewable energy.   "We may all have had different approaches, methods and expectations of where the solution would come from...Harmony didn't mean singing the same tune, but drawing what we needed from each other to nourish the symphony." Tina Louise Rothery, Blackpool THE LEGAL TEAM Throughout the campaign our legal and planning team has supported local communities threatened by fracking.They've helped seek justice in the courts and through the planning system. They've been at the heart of key moments leading up to this momentous victory. Moments like Lancashire County Council's rejection of two planning applications for fracking ­ or when we helped end government's plans to make it easier for fracking companies to drill without planning permission.Your support helps us fund more cases and more good days in court.  Our campaign to double tree cover  To mark 100 years since the UK started a planting drive, Friends of the Earth launched a campaign to sustainably double the UK's tree cover in the fight against climate breakdown. The campaign seeks to secure a government pledge by December 2020 to double tree cover from 3 to 6 billion trees. Trees play a crucial role in the process of reducing carbon from our atmosphere as well as protecting communities from flooding. Yet the UK has only 13% tree cover, less than half the European average. As part of the campaign, our analysis revealed areas of England with the lowest tree cover, which received  features in national news, regional broadcast and regional print. We also condemned the lack of government funding provided for trees, which stands at just 20p per person after a slump of more than 50% in four years. Thanks to the campaign our local and Climate Action groups have also made it a priority to increase tree cover in their communities. Oxford Friends of the Earth launched a petition to double Oxfordshire's tree cover by 2045. The group also held a campaign launch in November which brought together different community groups to plant 650 trees. To mark National Tree Week in November 2019, Friends of the Earth held tree planting events in Manchester, Nottingham and Enfield, where local residents planted 500 saplings.  Friends of the Earth collaborated with TV presenter and historian Dan Snow MBE to create a special video series under the hashtag #MoreTreesPlease as part of our wider campaign. Dan carried out a series of interviews with artists and scientists on the connection between trees, the natural world and our wellbeing. The video received around 55,000 views on Twitter alone and we increased Friends of the Earth mailing list subscribers by over 200.   Other campaigns  Divestment We've provided training, support and advice to activists who are campaigning to get their councils and other institutions to divest from fossil fuels. We co-organised a residential Fossil Free UK Gathering for divestment activists and ran divestment workshops and strategy sessions across the UK. We also worked with groups during May 2019 council elections to engage with local government and ran training sessions for councillors who want to help their own councils divest. Our divestment successes have continued to accumulate across England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Many English councils have continued to tilt their investments away from fossil fuels while the National Trust pledged to divest from all fossil fuels in July 2019. In March 2019, Newry, Mourne and Down became the first council in Northern Ireland to pass a divestment motion, and several other councils in Northern Ireland have subsequently passed divestment motions. In July 2019, Cardiff councillors voted almost unanimously to divest the Cardiff and Vale of Glamorgan Pension Fund from fossil fuels. Plastics An estimated 6 million single-use plastic beer cups are used during an average Premier League season. This is an alarming number. Friends of the Earth launched a campaign to eliminate single-use plastic from football. In collaboration with the British Association for Sustainable Sport we are calling on football clubs to adopt a series of measures to boot out unnecessary single-use plastic. Some of these measures include introducing a returnable cup scheme in stadiums by the start of the next season and ending the current use of non-essential single plastics for straws, sachets, cutlery etc. In addition, to engage with fans, visitors and surrounding communities about the importance of curbing single-use plastics. The campaign came in response to a YouGov poll commissioned by us, which revealed that 84% of football fans agree that clubs should ensure reusable or returnable cups are used in their stadiums. Over 35,000 people have backed the Friends of the Earth call for #PlasticFreeFootball.  My World My Home Our youth leadership programme went from strength to strength in 2019, with the stand-out achievement being an incredible weekend Youth Gathering, organised by 4 participants of My World My Home and hosted by Ifeoma Ekemezie and Tom Jayamaha, both of whom are 20 years old. The weekend, attended by 75 young people, featured discussions and seminars on climate activism, with a particular focus on fostering inclusivity within the climate movement. The Youth and Families team have also worked in partnership with youth-led environmental organisations UK Student Climate Network and UK Youth Climate Coalition over 2019, providing advice and support on wellbeing, safeguarding and the inclusion of marginalised people in the climate movement. My World My Home is part of Our Bright Future, which is an innovative partnership led by The Wildlife Trusts bringing the youth and environmental sectors together. The £33 million programme, funded by the National Lottery Community Fund, is formed of 31 projects across the UK. Each project is helping young people aged 11-24 gain vital skills and experience and improve their wellbeing. At the same time, they act as catalysts for delivering change for their local environment and community. Click here to watch Arsenal save half a million plastic cups   Other campaigns Heathrow legal challenge Heathrow airport is already one of the largest single sources of carbon emissions in the UK. Planned expansion ­ a third runway ­ could lead to 700 extra flights per day. People around the world are already suffering the effects of climate breakdown. Yet this proposed expansion would mean even more planet-warming emissions. More emissions that will leave future generations bearing the brunt of extreme climate impacts. But it isn't inevitable. Throughout 2019, Friends of the Earth's legal team has been leading the fight to stop Heathrow building its third runway. After initially losing at the High Court, we took our case to the Court of Appeal. Your support meant we were able to continue with the appeal, and to this day the expansion still hasn't gone ahead. Our campaign has generated lots of debate and media coverage. As a result, more people are talking about the contradiction of expanding an airport while promising to stop the climate emergency. And there are growing calls to overturn the decision to build the third runway. We hopefully await a positive result in 2020.  Wales  Caerphilly has joined a network of communities across the UK who are leading the way on tackling single-use plastic. Earlier this year Caerphilly attained the status of "plastic-free town" by marine conservation charity Surfers Against Sewage (SAS), thanks to a community-led campaign.Caerphilly Friends of the Earth collaborated with local businesses, concerned residents and schools to form Plastic FreeCaerphilly.  Registering with the SAS Plastic Free Communities movement, Plastic Free Caerphilly pulled together key organisations and businesses in the town to put in place a 5-point plan. The objectives included setting up a community led steering group, instigating the SAS Plastic Free Schools education programme, getting local council commitment and working with local businesses, organisations and community groups to spread the word and minimise the amount of disposable plastics they use. As well as raising awareness and reducing the town's plastic consumption, the group  also carried out a litter pick onCaerphillyMountain and a "mass unwrap", where local residents left plastic packaging at supermarket checkouts when paying. In August 2019 a launch party was organisedto commemorate the important team effort that was central to the town attaining its plastic-free communities approved status. In attendance were councillors, local business, and residents who celebrated with all of those involved in securing the award.   Northern Ireland Friends of the Earth Northern Ireland launched a film series to highlight the stories of people taking climate action across the country. The series, Northern Ireland Keepers, is part of a wider European "Keepers" project. From youth activists and farmers to local business owners, the project is a photographic exploration of a diverse network of people protecting nature across Europe. Here are some of the people and stories featured in the project:  Charlie Hamilton-Cooper, age 5 "My favourite place is the beach. I pick up rubbish there with my mummy and my daddy so all the different animals don't get dead." At 4 years old Charlie overheard his parents talking about the terrible impact of plastic pollution on marine wildlife. He has since completed over 40 beach cleans in many different locations with his parents.  Anne Harper "If you believe in something, you should do something about it" Anne's connection to the Knock Iveagh area ­ an ancient hill believed to be the site of Neolithic burial grounds ­ goes back many generations, and her attachment to the area has led her to create her own musical homage to it. She endeavours to remind people of the important sacred connection with the area that has existed for thousands of years which been lost in favour of big business and that prioritises profit over planet and people.  Dara McAnulty, age 15 "What matters to me is that every person experiences a connection with nature" Dara began writing about wildlife, conservation, and his experience of autism at age 12. His passion and determination have led him to speak at 10 Downing Street, appear alongside renowned conservationist Chris Packham and speak to crowds of thousands on the challenges faced by the natural world. JamesMcCabe "I consider my community here to be my number one support mechanism." James was inspired to take climate action 30 years ago after witnessing his childhood playground lost to quarrying, and has lobbied to protect natural spaces in Northern Ireland ever since. Most recently he has been fighting development in Lagmore Glen ­ an area rich in biodiversity ­ with other local residents.   Focus on: Brazil TheBrazilianAmazon rain forest is being cleared at a rate of 2 football fields a minute, according to Brazilian government data.It's the fastest rate of deforestation in a decade.  Many of us will worry about the worsening climate crisis, and loss of species, as the world's largest tropical rainforest shrinks. But the injustice goes beyond that. Brazilians living in the Amazon are losing their livelihoods and their homes. In August 2019 we ran an emergency appeal asking for your donations to help those affected and to campaign against the destruction. We asked Arthur from Friends of the Earth Brazil to explain the situation on the ground and the actions they're taking thanks to your support. "Burning in the Amazon has happened for many years. Large landowners deforest an area and illegally harvest the wood, then burn the land to make it suitable for planting cash crops like soy or to graze cattle for the meat industry. None of this is new, but it reached new heights after [President] Bolsonaro's hate speech against rural, indigenous and quilombola (descendants of slaves) workers ­ not to mention his dismantling of environmental policies and enforcement agencies.  One of the themes we picked up on when speaking to communities, was how partisan the media is in Brazil. Journalism is concentrated in the hands of the powerful. It is difficult to find space for the voices of communities. That is why we are making an effort to share people's stories. Going forward, we are working on the idea of carrying out comms training in the affected territories to empower communities and make sure their voices are heard. We have chosen to act together with our allies, strengthening their actions and influence rather than acting alone. We want to empower the organisations and people who have dedicated their lives to survival in the Amazon. The immaterial gains that this exchange of knowledge provides will serve the long term and be useful across many struggles. Thank you very much for the support you have given in defense of biodiversity and the peoples of the Amazon."  In December, we visited communities in and around the city of Santarém in the Amazon. There, the siege is evident: illegal loggers, soybeans, mining... in short, an enormous force causing pain and death.  Focus on: Manchester Friends of the Earth  In Autumn 2019, Manchester Friends of the Earth signed up to a campaign to bring the city's buses back under public control. Supporting the Better Buses for Greater Manchester campaign was part of its wider mission to reduce the number of car journeys and slash transport emissions. Without quality public transport and safe walking and cycling routes, getting people out of their cars is a hard sell. Private companies have controlled  Manchester buses since the 80s. Under this system, some areas have become virtual deserts for bus services ­ with operators cutting unprofitable routes. In fact, Manchester has lost 8 million miles of bus services since 2010, despite increases in fares. The Better Buses campaign petitioned the city's mayor, Andy Burnham, to regulate the buses and make private operators bid to run services. This would give the council the power to choose bus routes, timetables and fares. It's how services are run in London and much of Europe. The locals seem to be on board.  11,000 people signed a petition, which Better Buses handed in to Mr Burnham before a public consultation on the issue closed. The mayor is expected to make a decision on the scheme in March. Manchester Friends of the Earth got right behind the campaign, encouraging its supporters to sign the petition ­ and raising awareness in the community about the chance to change the buses for the better.   Brexit The ongoing Brexit process is a challenging and rapidly shifting area to campaign in (particularly over the last few months). Our Legal, Political and Planning team has been working in 3 key areas to protect the UK's environmental standards for the future: 1. Lobbying MPs and building public support within the UK for locking in environmental protections. 2. Advocating for a climate-positive approach to future trade and greater scrutiny of future trade deals in the media and through decision-makers. 3. Liaising with decision-makers andFriends of the Earth groups in EU memberstates to ensure that there's pressure from inside the EU to include a commitment to high standards and joint measures to safeguard our shared environment in any future UK/EU relationship. Our aims include: · Preventing a watering down of current environmental protections. · Supporting the creation of a strong, independent environmental watchdog to replace the UK's access to the European Court of Justice. · Ensuring ongoing UK access to or replacement of the EU bodies and mechanisms that protect our environment. · Ensuring our environment isn't a pawn in future trade deals ­ if the UK adopts an independent trade policy, this must be based on legal commitments to require imports to meet our own standards and strong enforceable environmental safeguards throughout the process. · And finally, we are calling for the UK to develop a world leading sustainable trade policy, and to rule out trade with countries currently failing to respect and implement the Paris agreement.  WHERE YOUR SUPPORT GOES Friends of the Earth Charitable Trust Friends of the Earth Charitable Trust is committed to the conservation, protection and improvement of the environment and promotes sustainable development for public benefit. It furthers these objectives by campaigning, undertaking research, education and publishing, and providing an information service on solutions to environmental problems. Friends of the Earth comprises two separate legal entities ­ Friends of the Earth Charitable Trust (a registered charity) and Friends of the Earth Limited (a not-for-profit company limited by guarantee). They work closely together, sharing staff, resources and a brand, in order to achieve their separate but similar objects as cost effectively as possible.   What's next 2020 is set to be a big year. We expect decisions on Heathrow's third runway and the planned coal mine at Druridge Bay will be announced, and the all-important US presidential election will take place.  Throughout the year, we'll be working on our own set of priorities aimed at helping people and planet.  An enhanced climate ambition Our approach to win urgent climate action in 2020 centres on: · Movement building, so there's a strong and effective network of activists who lead and win local campaigns, and who can mobilise their power together with the wider movement to influence national change. · Public support, so the UK public think that climate is a top priority, they know what the solutions look like and they feel positive about climate justice. By knowing the solutions, they feel empowered to act and are consciously making climate a deal-breaker as an individual and as a citizen. · Securing policy wins which means the UK government and local governments have committed to taking urgent action in line with our Climate Action Plan. International Justice · Demanding that the UK stops funding dirty energy abroad. The UK undermines any climate gains we're making by investing in coal, oil and gas projects in other countries, often places suffering the worst impacts of climate breakdown.  More money for climate action · Scaling up government spending (to 2% of GDP) to address climate breakdown. In 2019 we calculated how much a transition to a greener future might cost. It's a lot but climate breakdown is very much like a credit card bill. The longer you don't deal with it, the more expensive it gets. And · Campaign to safeguard environment protections and support a close and cooperative future relationship with the EU once the UK exists the EU. · Continue to support individuals, local groups and Climate Action groups to create environmental solutions in their communities.  