ENHANCING NATIONALLY
DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS
THROUGH PROTECTED AREAS

AUTHORS
Abigail Hehmeyer, Jacqueline Vogel, Shaun Martin, Ryan Bartlett
WWF
For more than 50 years, WWF has been protecting the future of nature. One
of the world’s leading conservation organizations, WWF works in nearly 100
countries and is supported by more than 1.1 million members in the United
States and 5 million supporters globally. WWF’s unique way of working
combines global reach with a foundation in science, involves action at every level
from local to global, and ensures the delivery of innovative solutions that meet
the needs of both people and nature. Visit worldwildlife.org to learn more.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Funding for this analysis, conducted by WWF US, was made possible by the
Support Project for the Implementation of the Paris Agreement (SPA), which
is implemented by Deutsche Gesellschaft für Internationale Zusammenarbeit
(GIZ) and funded by the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature
Conservation and Nuclear Safety (BMU) under its International Climate
Initiative (IKI).
TABLE OF CONTENTS
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 2
BACKGROUND 5
METHODOLOGY 7
RESULTS 13
1. EXPLICIT MENTION OF PROTECTED AREAS 13
2. ESTABLISHING NEW OR EXPANDING EXISTING PROTECTED AREAS 14
3. UTILIZING PROTECTED AREAS TO HELP PEOPLE ADAPT TO CLIMATE
CHANGE (ECOSYSTEM-BASED ADAPTATION) 15
4. MITIGATION BENEFITS FROM CARBON SEQUESTRATION AND
AVOIDED EMISSIONS 17
5. MANAGING PROTECTED AREAS FOR CLIMATE CHANGE RISKS 18
DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS 20
CONCLUSION 27
GLOSSARY 28
APPENDICES 31
APPENDIX 1: RESULTS BY COUNTRY 31
APPENDIX 2: COUNTRIES RANKED BY CREDITS EARNED FOR THE
5 CRITERIA EXAMINED 39
APPENDIX 3: COUNTRIES REFERENCED IN THIS REPORT, LISTED BY REGION 41
REFERENCES 43

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
Nationally Determined Commitments (NDCs) to the United Nations Framework
Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) 2015 Paris Agreement underscore the
role protected areas and other conserved areas play in reaching global mitigation and
adaptation targets. With financial support from the German Federal Ministry for the
Environment, Nature Conservation and Nuclear Safety (BMU), WWF US reviewed 151
currently available NDCs to determine how Parties intend to utilize protected areas to
contribute to their adaptation and mitigation commitments. Results show that of the 179
countries included in this analysis, 67—more than one-third—identified protected areas
as a means of attaining their adaptation and mitigation goals. Of these, almost half (32)
expressed an intention to add new protected areas or expand coverage of those already in
place. While these numbers are encouraging, there is ample room for improvement.
For example, 36 countries indicated plans to increase forest cover, plant trees or
expand natural areas, but did not clearly state if or how these areas might be protected
or managed. Nature-based solutions to climate change adaptation and mitigation using
protected areas were largely absent. Only 21 countries (12%) specifically mentioned
the carbon sequestration benefits that protected areas can provide, while just 8 (4%)
acknowledged the role that ecosystem services from protected areas can play in helping
vulnerable people adapt to climate change. Finally, only 10 NDCs pledged to manage
protected areas for current or anticipated climate change risks to ecosystems and
biodiversity.
While Nationally Determined Contributions are a communications tool and
not a comprehensive inventory of all national and subnational plans for climate
change adaptation and mitigation targets, they are a good indicator of the status
national governments give to protected areas in achieving climate change goals.
WWF acknowledges the likelihood of extensive under-reporting of strategies and
activities involving protected and other conserved areas as a component of national
contributions. Yet including these in NDCs would be a simple way to demonstrate
increased ambition and call attention to the need for critical ecosystem services and
biodiversity for future prosperity.
The socioeconomic and ecological benefits of protected areas have been welldocumented. Success in achieving climate change goals by conserving biodiversity and
safeguarding ecosystem services will largely depend on Parties’ willingness and ability
to adhere to the commitments they make to global conventions, and how well protected
and conserved areas are managed. Further research will be needed to track progress
and evaluate impact.
36
COUNTRIES
indicated plans to
increase forest cover,
plant trees or expand
natural areas
21
COUNTRIES
specifically mentioned
the carbon
sequestration benefits
that protected areas
can provide
Recommendations
To enhance climate ambition through protected and conserved areas, WWF encourages
Parties revising their NDCs for 2020 and beyond to consider the following five
recommendations based on this analysis:
1. Acknowledge the role that protected and other conserved areas play in
achieving climate change adaptation and mitigation goals and include them in NDCs
and related climate change policies.
2. Increase coverage of protected and conserved areas and set specific, measurable
and time-bound targets (hectares conserved, percentage increase in coverage by 2030,
etc.)
3. Clearly articulate the role of protected and conserved areas in helping people
adapt to climate change, and link specific climate hazards and vulnerable populations
with the appropriate ecosystem services needed for adaptation.
4. Integrate the carbon sequestration benefits of protected and other conserved
areas into climate change mitigation targets.
5. Commit to managing protected and other conserved areas for current and
anticipated climate risks to ecosystems and biodiversity while calling attention to
the need for increased technical and financial support to improve protected area
management in the face of rapid change.
Protected areas and other conserved areas, such as indigenous and community
conserved areas, sacred natural sites and military lands can contribute to much
needed climate change adaptation and mitigation goals, yet they have not been
comprehensively addressed in Nationally Determined Contributions submitted to
the UNFCCC. Protected and other conserved areas are also important components
of national commitments to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals and
the Convention on Biological Diversity. WWF strongly encourages Parties to consider
the myriad benefits that nature provides and emphasize the importance of ecosystem
conservation and biodiversity in their revised NDCs.

BACKGROUND
Protected areas and other conserved areas, such as indigenous and community
conserved lands and sacred natural areas, have played a critical role in biodiversity
conservation for the past century. Beyond providing a haven for species, these areas
also provide vital ecosystem services that sustain livelihoods, connect landscapes,
capture and store carbon, and inspire people to value the natural world. Healthy,
well-managed protected areas are critical to the 2015 Paris Agreement’s ambitions of
creating a low-carbon global economy and a climate-resilient world. The role of forests
and other natural systems in sequestering carbon has been well-documented. Similarly,
protected areas provide a suite of ecosystem services that help vulnerable communities
during extreme weather events. These include protection from soil erosion due to heavy
rainfall, coastal storm surge and wave attenuation, and flooding. National governments
would benefit from acknowledging the benefits that nature provides by placing
protected and other conserved areas at the center of their commitments to addressing
climate-related challenges.
However, almost all protected areas were designed, and continue to be managed, with
the assumption of a stationary climate. Climate change is already causing shifts in
species composition, habitat types, and ecosystem function, challenging their ability to
meet goals and objectives they were designed for. As the climate continues to change,
protected areas will be further impacted as people shift agricultural production, build
new infrastructure, and move away from coasts and floodplains. To ensure these
natural areas continue to deliver benefits, we must increase efforts to protect them
from further degradation and climate change itself. By including conserved areas
in Nationally Determined Contributions to the UNFCCC, Parties can demonstrate
commitment to nature-based solutions and emphasize the importance of protected
natural areas to human well-being.
With financial support from the German Federal Ministry for the Environment, Nature
Conservation and Nuclear Safety (BMU), WWF US conducted a review of currently
available Nationally Determined Contributions to assess the extent of Parties’ use of
protected and other conserved areas for adaptation and mitigation benefits, to identify
promising approaches and gaps. Findings were used to develop recommendations for
Parties to enhance the role of protected areas in their revised NDCs for submission to
the UNFCCC in 2020 and beyond.
A second objective of this study was to learn whether governments consider climate
change risks to nature to better inform protected area management. Governments,
protected area managers and conservation groups alike often neglect the increasing
risk that climate change poses to protected areas and the ecosystem services they
provide. Most planners and managers of the world’s protected areas do not consider
climate risks, instead relying on traditional approaches to conservation that are rapidly
becoming obsolete with increased warming and climate variability. WWF believes
that a viable future for people and nature mandates that conservation efforts and
strategies—including the management of protected and other conserved areas—are 
continuously updated to account for unavoidable climate change risks to biodiversity,
ecosystems and ecosystem services. National governments have a vested interest in
doing so to ensure that protected areas continue to deliver on commitments to their
citizens and to the UNFCCC, the Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD), and the UN
Sustainable Development Goals.
METHODOLOGY
For this analysis WWF reviewed 151 NDCs representing 179 countries submitted to the
UNFCCC NDC Registry by December 31st 2018. The 151 NDCs reviewed include 49
from Africa, 38 from Asia, 43 from Europe, 31 from Latin America and the Caribbean,
two from North America (Canada and the United States), and 17 from Oceania.
Sixteen Parties to the UNFCCC either did not ratify the 2015 Paris Agreement or
ratified but did not submit an NDC by December 31, 2018, and therefore were not
included in the analysis. These countries are Angola, Brunei Darussalam, Ecuador,
Iran, Iraq, Kyrgyzstan, Lebanon, Libya, Oman, Philippines, Russia, Senegal, South
Sudan, Suriname, Turkey, and Yemen.
NDCs varied greatly in both length and level of detail. WWF reviewers read each in
full for this analysis. For NDCs submitted in Spanish (9) or French (10), WWF used
Google Translate (translate.google.com) to convert text to English and then the English
translation was read in full. Each non-English NDC document was scanned using a
keyword search for protected areas along with related French and Spanish language
terms listed below to ensure that nothing was overlooked due to translation errors.
To determine if Parties included protected areas in their NDCs and how the protected
areas are being used to achieve climate change adaptation and mitigation targets, WWF
reviewed each NDC document to answer the following five questions:
• Does the NDC mention protected areas explicitly?
• Does the NDC call for establishing new or expanding existing protected areas?
• Does the NDC mention utilizing protected areas to help people adapt to climate
change (also known as ecosystem-based adaptation or EbA).
• Does the NDC mention utilizing protected areas to achieve carbon sequestration
or avoided emissions benefits?
• Does the NDC indicate plans to use climate risk information and climate adaptive
measures to manage protected areas?
Countries received credit for each affirmative answer, indicated by a “●” in the country
results table in Appendix 1. For questions 2 and 5, if a country did not reference
protected or other conserved areas explicitly in its NDC but mentioned nature or
equivalent terms when addressing these topics, it received partial credit, indicated by
a “●” in the country results table. Thus, “conserve forests by increasing the number of
protected areas” would receive full credit (or one point) for question 2, while “increase
forest cover on degraded lands” would receive partial credit (or one-half point).
Similarly, for questions 3 and 4, countries that mentioned or implied using naturebased solutions for climate change mitigation and adaptation outside the context of
protected areas received partial credit, indicated by a “●” in the country results table.
The rationale and methods used to provide full or partial credit for each of the five
questions are provided below.
5 criteria
used for
evaluating
NDCs and
Protected
Areas:
1. Explicit mention
of protected or
other conserved
areas
2. Establishment
or expansion of
protected areas
3. Use of protected
areas to help
people adapt (EbA)
4. Mitigation
benefits
from carbon
sequestration and
avoided emissions
5. Managing
protected areas
for climate change
risks

1. Does the NDC mention protected areas explicitly?
There are currently more than 238,000 protected areas across the globe, and this
number is expected to increase
1
. Terrestrial protected areas cover more than 20 million
km2—almost 15% of the earth’s land surface, while marine protected areas cover more
than 6 million km2—more than 7% of the world’s oceans
1
. The Convention on Biological
Diversity’s Aichi Biodiversity Targets call for the protection of at least 17% of the earth’s
terrestrial areas by 2020
2
. As global population numbers and their associated human
footprint increase, many scientists and activists are calling to conserve 30% of the
worlds surface by 2030
3
 as a stepping stone towards the goal of conserving half the
planet by 2050
4
. Protected areas will play a critical role in achieving these ambitious
targets.
Increasingly, new protected areas are established not only to protect iconic species
and landscapes, but also to serve a range of other functions such as enhancing local
livelihoods, improving fishery stocks, increasing carbon sequestration, and helping
people adapt to the impacts of climate change
5
. Because protected areas serve
conservation and climate action objectives simultaneously, national governments
should consider the role of protected and conserved areas in their NDCs to help to
align technical and financial support for these areas within government legislation and
policies.
For the purposes of this study, “protected areas” include those areas that are actively
managed to achieve clear biodiversity conservation (but not necessarily other) goals.
Parties received credit for question 1 if one or more of the following terms appeared in
its NDC:

• Protected area • Natural protected area • Protected area system • Protected lands • Protected zones • Protected natural spaces • Wildlife refuge • Wildlife sanctuary • Protected forest • Forest reserve • Conservation areas • Biodiversity conservation areas
• Indigenous areas (when used in the
context of conservation)
• Indigenous lands (when used in the
context of conservation)
• Nature reserve • Biosphere reserve • Área protegida (Spanish) • Reserva natural (Spanish) • Refugio de vida silvestre (Spanish) • Parque nacional (Spanish) • Aires protégées (French)
METHODOLOGY
238k
PROTECTED AREAS
across the globe,
and this number is
expected to increase
1
The following terms were not included in this analysis because of ambiguity about
whether these areas had been established, or were actively managed, for the purpose of
biodiversity conservation: 
• Managed forest • Protection forestry strip • Forest managed areas • Native forest
Many NDCs use the verb “protect” or “protected” without using the phrase “protected
area.” WWF determined that for the purpose of this analysis, all forms of the verb
“protect” in conjunction with nature and natural systems convey an explicit intention
to preserve and protect nature and therefore phrases using this word when referring
to natural systems could be considered as “protected areas.” For example, Antigua
and Barbuda declares that “by 2030, all waterways are protected to reduce the risks
of flooding and health impacts.” Belize mentions “protecting and restoring mangrove
forests” for climate change mitigation. In both these cases, these countries received
credit for this question.*
*In cases where language around nature and protected areas was vague or ambiguous,
WWF used its best judgement to determine the meaning and intent of the statements. WWF
acknowledges that it may not have interpreted every statement correctly and is open to
feedback and comments that may lead to revisions.
2. Does the NDC call for the establishment of new, or
expansion of existing, protected areas?
Protected areas already help to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions and provide services
that help vulnerable people adapt to climate change. Managing natural resources
specifically for these purposes is increasingly seen as an important part of achieving
climate change goals. Protected areas help buffer communities from extreme events
like cyclones and flooding. Many protected areas also sequester carbon in vegetation
and soil, including so called “blue carbon”, the carbon stored in coastal and marine
protected ecosystems
6
. National governments should consider establishing new
protected areas, or expanding those already in place, as the existing scope of protected
areas is not enough to achieve these goals
7
. For ecosystems to adapt to climate change,
land use needs to be carefully managed so plants and animals can relocate to newly
climatically suitable areas, and those areas where the future climate will remain
suitable are protected
8. This indicates a need for considerable expansion of protected
area networks
9
.
Parties received full credit for this question if they indicated a clear intent to establish
new protected or other conserved areas or to expand the coverage of existing areas
to achieve climate change goals. They received partial credit if they indicated intent
to increase coverage of natural areas but did not refer to protection or management
for conservation purposes explicitly. Examples of phrases that received partial
credit include “increase forest cover,” “plant trees,” “establish biological corridors,”
“afforestation,” “reforestation or restoration of mangroves and forests” and “wetland or
coral reef rehabilitation.”
3. Does the NDC mention utilizing protected areas to help
people adapt to climate change (also known as ecosystembased adaptation or EbA)?
Ecosystem-based adaptation or EbA, uses nature to help people adapt to the impacts
of climate change. EbA often focuses on protecting or restoring ecosystems to
safeguard ecosystem provisioning and regulating services to reduce people’s climate
vulnerability. Examples of EbA include planting mangroves on vulnerable coastlines to
protect people from increased storm surges or restoring forests to prevent soil erosion
from increasingly frequent rainfall events. As extreme weather events grow more
frequent, well managed protected areas are increasingly necessary to buffer vulnerable
populations from the impacts of droughts, floods, storms and other hazards6
.
Parties that showed a clear intent to harness ecosystem services from protected
and other conserved areas to help safeguard people and their livelihoods from the
adverse impacts of climate change received full credit for this question, even if the
term “ecosystem-based adaptation” was not used. Parties received partial credit if
their NDCs referred to using nature, ecosystems, biodiversity, or ecosystem services
to help people adapt to climate change but did not mention the role of protected areas
specifically. A number of countries used the term “ecosystem-based adaptation” in ways
that do not conform to the accepted definition of using nature to help people adapt,
sometimes conflating the concept of EbA with improved conservation to help nature
itself. In these cases, Parties received no credit for this question.
4. Does the NDC mention utilizing protected areas to
deliver carbon sequestration or avoided emissions
benefits?
It is estimated that protected areas account for about one fifth of all the carbon
sequestered by terrestrial ecosystems each year7
. Protected areas in North and South
America and Africa account for the highest percentage of protected area carbon stocks,
about 60% of the total6
. Although different ecosystems store different amounts of
carbon, most protected areas serve as carbon reservoirs6
. Tropical forests store the most
terrestrial carbon, followed by boreal forests. However, carbon sequestration in both of
these ecosystems is at risk due to climate change. Drying in tropical forests such as the
Amazon, and increased fires and pests in boreal forests undermine their sequestration
potential6
.
Inland wetlands, specifically peatlands, only cover about 3% of the earth’s land
surface but are estimated to store as much carbon as all other terrestrial ecosystems
combined. Protecting wetlands and peatlands is vital to ensure that these ecosystems
remain intact, as drainage or mismanagement would result in a massive increase in
carbon emissions6
. Salt marshes, mangroves and seagrass beds are also important
carbon sinks6
. Nations can combat degradation of ecosystems within protected areas
to capitalize on their carbon sequestration capacity. They can also expand existing
protected areas or establish new ones for the same purpose.
Parties received credit for this question if their NDCs mentioned protected or other
conserved areas for the purpose of carbon sequestration or avoided emissions to help
achieve their climate change mitigation targets. Parties received partial credit for
referring to nature-based solutions to climate change mitigation without mentioning
the role of protected areas specifically. NDCs received partial credit for terms including
“REDD+ (reducing emissions from deforestation and degradation)”, “mitigationfriendly forest management systems” and “agroforestry.”
5. Does the NDC indicate plans to use climate risk
information and climate adaptive measures to manage
protected areas?
Protected areas established to conserve biodiversity in the face of anthropogenic threats
are unlikely to serve as safe havens from projected climate impacts10. Protected areas
within biodiversity hotspots will likely experience the same climate impacts as nonprotected areas10, and therefore managers must plan for and manage these changes.
In some cases, this might mean fundamentally reexamining the intended purpose
of a protected area and whether it will be able to continue to serve that role as the
climate changes. How long can the area remain a suitable habitat for the species it was
established to protect? What new species may colonize the area? Can the protected
area serve a new purpose under a changing climate even if key species are lost?
Many conserved places may need to manage for ecosystem functionality rather than
ecosystem composition. Managing protected and other conserved areas for change
and not just persistence will become increasingly urgent as the climate continues to
change—even if temperature stabilization goals are achieved.
In spite of the need for continued ecosystem services, most countries do not yet
take climate risks on biodiversity and ecosystems into consideration when it comes
to managing their existing protected areas or selecting and designing sites for new
protected areas. If nations intend to rely on ecosystem services from protected and
other natural areas to achieve climate change adaptation and mitigation goals—while
conserving biodiversity and providing other important ecosystem services to their
citizens and economies—conservationists and protected area managers must ensure
that natural systems can adapt to safeguard functionality under a changing climate.
WWF reviewed NDCs to learn which Parties, if any, intend to go beyond traditional
conservation measures to manage protected and other conserved areas for known or
anticipated climate change risks. To receive full credit for this question, an NDC must
have demonstrated clear intent to adapt, improve, or revise protected area management
plans and strategies, to incorporate climate change, and manage risks on biodiversity
and ecosystems. Climate adaptive measures for biodiversity include facilitating change
within a protected area to ensure sustained functionality, establishing movement
corridors to help species migrate to protected areas with more favorable climates,
establishing new protected areas identified as climate refugia (places that will remain
climatically suitable for species), and using species resilient to increased climate
variability for ecosystem restoration within a conserved area.
Parties received partial credit for this question if their NDCs displayed intent to manage
nature, ecosystems, or biodiversity for climate risks without mentioning protected
or other conserved areas specifically. Countries that used ambiguous terms such as
“building resilience” of protected areas, species or ecosystems, without explicitly
mentioning adapting conservation management, received no credit. Statements that did
not include specific actions to build resilience to known or anticipated climate change
impacts, were interpreted as traditional conservation strategies rather than forward
looking “climate-smart” adaptation actions and therefore did not receive credit.
RESULTS
1. Explicit mention of protected areas
The 2015 Paris Agreement requires all Parties outline and communicate their post2020 climate change actions. These Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs)
represent each country’s commitment to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions and
adapt to the adverse impacts of climate change. There were no instructions by the
UNFCCC to include biodiversity, natural resource management, or the role of protected
areas in NDCs. Nonetheless, 67 countries (37%) explicitly mentioned protected areas or
other conserved areas.
Although the majority of Parties did not specifically mention protected or other
conserved areas in the NDCs, many did include terms synonymous with nature and
biodiversity. A recent analysis by WWF-UK11, examined the alignment between the
NDCs and the Aichi Biodiversity Targets and found that many countries are integrating
biodiversity and climate change into their sustainable development planning and are
reporting this in their NDCs.
There was significant regional variance among countries that explicitly mention protected
areas in their NDC and those that do not. Nearly two-thirds (65%) of countries in Latin
America and the Caribbean referred to protected areas, while North America and
the European Union did not. Belarus and Georgia were the only European nations
to explicitly mention protected areas in their NDCs. Half of all submissions from Parties
in Africa and Asia mention protected areas (49% and 51% respectively), while only one
in five (18%) countries from Oceania did so.
There were also significant disparities
among countries when grouped
by economic development, with
developing countries citing protected
areas much more frequently than more
advanced economies. Protected and
conserved areas were mentioned by
41% of Small Island Developing
States (SIDs) and 60% of Least
Developed Countries (LDCs). Of
the 33 Organization for Economic
Co-operation and Development
(OECD) countries that submitted
NDCs by the end of 2018, only Mexico
referenced protected or other conserved
areas. Parties that included protected
areas or terms for other conserved
areas received full credit for this
question, indicated by a “●” in the
country results table in Appendix 1.
2. Establishing new or expanding existing protected areas
Of the countries that specifically mention protected areas, almost half demonstrated
plans to establish new or expand existing protected or other conserved areas, equaling
nearly one in five (18%) of the all countries evaluated. Some countries included specific
time-bound and measurable targets. For example, Guyana indicated plans to conserve
“an additional 2 million hectares of land through the country’s National Protected Area
System.” Tonga stated plans “to double the number of Marine Protected Areas by
2030.”
Other NDCs cite more general ambitions. Mauritius vows to “improve the
management of marine and terrestrial protected areas and expand protected area
networks” but does not include details about the scope of the expansion or the expected
time frame. Countries that explicitly mentioned establishing new or expanding existing
protected or other conserved areas in their NDCs received full credit for this question,
indicated by a “●” in the country results table in Appendix 1.
One in five countries stated commitments to increase natural areas—such as increasing
forest cover or planting mangroves—but did not specify whether these areas would
be protected or managed for conservation purposes. For example, Liberia plans
to “increase the amount of forested land through reforestation of degraded lands.”
Thailand states it intends to “increase national forest cover to 40% through local
community participation.” Bangladesh has committed to “provide support to scale up
afforestation and reforestation” and notes that “about 195,000 hectares of mangrove
plantations have been raised so far.” However, none of these countries mention
protected areas explicitly and received only half credit for question 2, indicated by a “●”
in the country results table in Appendix 1.
3. Utilizing protected areas to help people adapt to climate
change (ecosystem-based adaptation)
Very few NDCs included explicit plans to use current or future protected areas to
help people adapt to climate change. Only eight countries—Antigua and Barbuda,
Belize, Guinea Bissau, Jordan, Kuwait, Mongolia, Saudi Arabia, and St.
Vincent and the Grenadines—stated or implied that ecosystem services provided
by protected areas could reduce the vulnerability of people to climate change impacts
(4%). Guinea Bissau states that “with an increase in…protected areas from 15% to
26%…coastal protection against the rising sea level and other types of erosion [will
be enhanced].” Belize declares that “protecting and restoring mangrove forests…[is]
expected to protect the coastline against storm surges and erosion; which are increasing
in frequency as a result of climate change.” These countries received full credit for
question 3, indicated by a “●” in the table of country results in Appendix 1.
Twenty-nine countries (16%) use language that implies ecosystem-based adaptation
but not in the context of protected areas. Some countries use the phrase EbA explicitly,
while others describe ways in which they will use nature to help people adapt, without
characterizing these measures as EbA.
Twenty-nine percent of Latin America and Caribbean countries, 19% of Asian
countries, 18% of Oceania countries and 14% of African countries reference EbA but
stop short of referring to protected areas specifically. For example, Morocco “commits
to restoring ecosystems and strengthening their resilience, to combat soil erosion and
prevent flooding.” Grenada is “undertaking several community ecosystem-based
adaptation actions including coral restoration, mangrove rehabilitation.” TimorLeste plans to “maintain mangrove plantations and promote awareness-raising to
protect coastal ecosystems from impacts of sea level rise.” The Marshall Islands are
undertaking “efforts such as mangrove and agriculture rehabilitation programs likely to
enhance carbon sinks as well as assist with protection of water resources and the health
of the RMI people.” These countries received half-credit for this question, indicated by
a “●” in the country results of Appendix 1. Countries of Europe and North America
make no reference to EbA in any context.
As with other questions in this review, countries may have under-reported their
ecosystem-based adaptation activities. Many nations have already received significant
funds for EbA and so have an opportunity to report on their efforts in revised NDCs.
For example, in 2016, the Green Climate Fund approved a $20.5 million grant for
the Gambia’s “Large-scale Ecosystem-based Adaptation in the Gambia River Basin:
developing a climate resilient, natural resource-based economy.”12 Now that it has
secured financing for EbA, the Gambia can inspire other nations by including this work
in a revised NDC.
4. Mitigation benefits from carbon sequestration and
avoided emissions
Twenty countries (12%) explicitly refer to the mitigation benefits that protected
areas provide through carbon sequestration and received full credit for this question,
indicated by a “●” in the table of country results in Appendix 1. Latin America
and Caribbean countries stand out for their efforts to utilize protected areas to
help achieve climate change mitigation targets, with more than a quarter (29%) of
countries in the region intending to do so. In contrast only 14% of African countries
refer to protected areas for carbon sequestration, while few countries in Europe (2%),
Oceania (6%) and Asia (8%) do. Neither Canada nor the United States includes
protected areas in climate change mitigation plans.
Antigua and Barbuda
demonstrates a strong commitment
by pledging that “by 2030, all
remaining wetlands and watershed
areas with carbon sequestration
potential are protected as carbon
sinks.” This is the only NDC that
plans to specifically designate new
conserved areas for climate change
mitigation. (According to the CIA
World Factbook, as of 2016, 22% of
Antigua and Barbuda’s 443 square
kilometers were forested13)
Some countries recognize the dual
conservation and climate benefits
that new protected areas can provide.
Mongolia states that “increasing
protected areas up to 25-30% of the
total territory will help maintain
natural ecosystems and preserve
water resources with…synergy effects
for emission reduction.”
Other countries plan to increase the
carbon sequestration capacity of their protected areas through REDD+ projects or other
restoration efforts. Nepal plans to “pilot a sub-national project on REDD+ to reduce
about 14 million tons of CO2(eq) by 2020 by addressing the drivers of deforestation
and forest degradation…in all types of forests and protected areas.” Panama will
increase the carbon storage capacity of protected areas by 10% through reforestation
and restoration.
Some 37% of countries mention mitigation benefits from natural areas (mangroves
and seagrass in Kiribati, forests in India, wetlands in China, for example) but do
not explicitly mention the carbon sequestration benefits from protected areas. These
countries received partial credit for question 4, indicated by a “●” in the table of country
results in Appendix 1.
5. Managing Protected Areas for Climate Change Risks
While some countries have started to incorporate protected areas into their climate
change solutions, very few have begun to consider the threat that climate change
poses to their protected areas and adapt management accordingly. Ideally, countries
should use climate risk information to adapt conservation plans to manage known and
anticipated impacts on species and ecosystems, particularly if Parties intend to use
nature-based climate solutions in their commitments to the Paris Agreement.
Just 10 countries mention using climate risk information or climate adaptive measures
to revise protected area management plans. Uruguay provides an example, stating,
“the management plans of at least six protected areas will include climate change and
variability considerations by 2025.”
Colombia’s NDC, while somewhat vague, is perhaps more comprehensive. It states
“100% of the national territory [will be] covered by climate change plans” which
ostensibly includes its protected and other conserved areas. In addition, according
to the NDC, “water resource management tools, which include climate change and
variability considerations will be in place for the country’s top priority water basins,”
areas that include extensive natural systems.
Sri Lanka mentions specific climate-adaptive measures it will take with plans
to “allocate special attention concerning climate adaptation related initiatives to
biodiversity and ecosystems.” This includes the “restoration of degraded areas
inside and outside the Protected Area (PA) network to enhance resilience, increase
connectivity through corridors, [as well as] landscape/matrix improvement and
management.” Sri Lanka also intentions to “improve management, and consider
increasing the extent of protected areas, buffer zones and create new areas in
vulnerable zones.”
These countries and others demonstrating similar activities received full credit for this
question, indicated by a “●” in the country results table in Appendix 1.
Notably, a few countries that do mention protected areas also discuss the need for
biological corridors, an important climate-risk management strategy for biodiversity.
Although range shifts due to climate change vary greatly by species, a recent study
found that on average, terrestrial species have shifted to higher latitudes at a rate of
16.9 kilometers per decade as a result of increased temperatures14. Marine species are
moving poleward at an average rate of 72 kilometers per decade15. Species will need
space to freely migrate to new locations as they seek suitable climates.
Ethiopia provides an example for corridors that other countries might replicate.
Its NDC states the intention to “create biodiversity movement corridors, especially
up towards higher terrain, in areas where most of the land is under cultivation. This
will minimize biodiversity loss through enabling the re-establishment and movement
of plant and animal species and varieties to areas suitable for their survival when
temperature rises.” Facilitating the movement of species through protected or managed
biological corridors will be crucial to minimizing biodiversity loss and ensuring
ecosystem services—including those needed for climate change adaptation and
mitigation.
Nearly 11% of countries state or imply that they will use climate-adaptive measures to
increase the resilience of natural areas but do not mention protected areas specifically.
For example, Tonga is “promoting reforestation and rehabilitation of cleared
and degraded forests with climate change resilient, and ecologically and socially
appropriate tree species.” Tajikistan plans to address “the impacts of climate change
by means of full-scale integration of climate resilience and adaptation measures…
[including] promotion of adaptation of globally significant biological species and
natural ecosystems to climate change.” Countries with similar commitments that do not
mention protected or conserved areas received partial credit for this question, indicated
by a “●” in the country results in Appendix 1.
DISCUSSION AND RECOMMENDATIONS
This review of 151 NDCs covering 179 countries identified Parties’ strengths
in utilizing protected and other conserved areas to support their adaptation
and mitigation goals. Some of the geographically smallest and least developed
countries (with the smallest contributions to global emissions) demonstrated
the greatest leadership by providing the most comprehensive commitments.
Antigua and Barbuda, the Bahamas, Cambodia, Republic of Congo,
Grenada, Guinea Bissau, Haiti, Jordan, Madagascar, Mali, Mongolia,
Sri Lanka, St. Vincent and the Grenadines, Uganda and Uruguay each
received 3.5 or more credits across the five criteria examined in the review.
The analysis also revealed significant gaps. Eighty-four NDCs made no reference to
protected or conserved areas whatsoever. Fifty-four countries did not include naturebased solutions to climate challenges even outside conserved areas. In stark contrast
to the leadership provided by developing nations, many of the world’s most developed
economies with the greatest resources to protect and manage natural areas failed to
consider the utilization of protected areas in their NDCs. European Union member
states, Norway, Switzerland, United States, Israel, Australia, Japan and the
Republic of Korea failed to receive credits for any the five questions examined in
the study. Among developed nations, only Canada received a single full credit for
“protecting and enhancing carbon sinks including in forests, wetlands and agricultural
lands,” while New Zealand received two partial credits for committing to establish
new forests to serve as carbon sinks. Iceland and Japan received a half credit each for
recognizing the value of nature for climate change mitigation*.
* Parties that received no credits for any of the five questions in this review are not necessarily
neglecting the importance of protected areas for their contributions to climate change
adaptation and mitigation goals nor are they necessarily failing to update management plans
to accommodate climate change considerations. It simply means that these efforts are not
included in their NDCs.
To increase ambition and highlight the role of protected areas while inspiring others to
action, WWF developed five recommendations for Parties as they work to revise their
NDCs for 2020 or in 5-year cycles as agreed in the 2015 Paris Agreement.
1. Acknowledge the role that protected and other
conserved areas can play in achieving climate change
adaptation and mitigation goals and include them in NDCs
and related climate change policies.
Although more than one third of Parties included the role of protected and other
conserved areas in their NDCs, 83 countries and the European Union (representing 28
countries), did not. Clearly there are opportunities to strengthen the role of conserved
areas in supporting the 2015 Paris Agreement. Among NDCs that did include protected
areas, most of the commitments were short and vague—often in the form of generalized
bullet points with little or no background or context. Interpreting the intentions and
rationale behind such vague statements was a challenge for this study. Countries
currently revising their NDCs should consider including the specific role of protected
areas for either adaptation, mitigation, or both.
2. Increase coverage of protected and conserved areas and
set specific, measurable and time-bound targets.
WWF encourages Parties to enhance adaptation and mitigation ambition by increasing
the coverage of areas under protection or managed for ecosystem services. Countries
should set specific and measurable targets when designating new or expanding
existing conserved areas that are critical to carbon sequestration and ecosystem-based
adaptation (EbA). Many countries have committed to adding or expanding protected
areas, but NDCs could be strengthened to include specific, measurable and time-bound
targets. For example, rather than simply stating that protected areas will be expanded,
Parties could provide specifics about the scope of the expansion and a specific time
frame. This echoes a previous WWF analysis of NDC commitments across the forest
sector that found most NDCs lacked concrete measurable targets16.
A strong example of setting clear and measurable targets comes from Colombia, which
plans to add “more than 2.5 million hectares in coverage of newly protected areas in the
National System of Protected Areas (SINAP), in coordination with local and regional
stakeholders.” These clear and measurable targets make it easier for countries to track
progress.
Other countries have included targets for expanding natural areas yet fail to include
details on whether these areas will be given legal protection status. Lao People’s
Democratic Republic lays out the ambitious plan of “increasing forest cover to a
total of 70% of land area by 2020,” but does not mention whether these forests will
be protected or managed. Similarly, Honduras has committed to “afforestation/
reforestation of 1 million hectares of forest before 2030” without stating if this newly
forested land will be granted any formal protection or be sustainably managed.
Increasing the extent of lands, freshwater bodies and oceans managed for climate
change adaptation and mitigation goals can create synergies with other global
conventions, but there is also potential for adverse social impacts. It will be very
important to ensure that any expansion of conserved areas does not displace
communities or undermine the rights or wellbeing of people. As the international
community rallies behind the New Deal for Nature and People with its target of
conserving at least 30% of terrestrial land and inland water areas and 30% of oceans by
2030, national governments should recognize that increasing protected and managed
forests, peatlands, mangroves and seagrasses can not only help meet biodiversity
conservation and sustainable development goals, but also climate change targets.
3. Clearly articulate the role of protected and conserved
areas in helping people adapt to climate change and link
specific climate hazards and vulnerable populations with
the appropriate ecosystem services needed for adaptation.
Very few countries have recognized the value of nature in helping vulnerable people
adapt to climate change and fewer still recognize the role that protected and conserved
areas can play in nature-based approaches to adaptation. Of the NDCs reviewed in this
study, 142 Parties did not include nature and ecosystem services as a critical component
of their adaptation plans. Parties are strongly encouraged to incorporate ecosystembased adaptation into their revised NDCs and consider how protected and conserved
areas can help to reduce the vulnerability of people exposed to extreme weather and the
impact of chronic stressors associated with climate change.
As mentioned, the brevity, ambiguity and lack of context was a barrier to interpreting
goals, intentions and rationales behind many statements on protected and conserved
areas. This was especially true when it came to evidence of “ecosystem-based
adaptation” plans. Even when countries used this term explicitly, it was often used
incorrectly, conflating it with adaptation that benefits nature rather than using nature
to benefit people. Many statements did not provide sufficient context to confirm that
actions constitute ecosystem-based adaptation.
For example, the Seychelles NDC states that the country plans a “shift toward
ecosystem-based adaptation approaches to biodiversity conservation.” However,
according to the accepted definition of EbA by the Convention on Biological Diversity,
ecosystem-based adaptation is not an approach to conserving biodiversity. Rather
it uses biodiversity and conservation measures as part of an overall strategy to help
people adapt to the adverse effects of climate change. The Vietnam NDC states
that it plans to “implement ecosystem-based adaptation through the development of
ecosystem services and biodiversity conservation, with a focus on the preservation of
genetic resources, species at risk of extinction, and important ecosystems.” Preserving
genetic diversity and safeguarding species at risk of extinction are worthy goals,
however neither is an example of ecosystem-based adaptation without any reference to
reducing human vulnerability.
Other commitments could be interpreted as ecosystem-based adaptation, but without
additional information, it was impossible to be certain. For example, as one of its many
adaptation contributions, Sao Tome and Principe plans to “increase the resilience
to erosion and maritime, river and storm flooding of coastal areas through improved
Coastal Protection for vulnerable communities.” There is no additional information
about whether the country plans to use hard engineering, such as sea walls or other
barriers, or ecosystem-based approaches to protect coastal communities.
Argentina states that its “priority activities to reduce vulnerability [include]
strengthening of initiatives that support the recovery and rehabilitation of lands,
including ecosystem-based adaptation.” Without additional information, is it difficult
to determine whether Argentina plans to use ecosystem-based adaptation measures to
help people or intends to help ecosystems themselves adapt.
Overall, Parties could strengthen their NDCs with more specifics on why they are taking
particular actions and for whom. Which groups are at risk? What sorts of climate
hazards do they face? How can protected areas help these groups adapt? Adaptation
actions and nature-based approaches can be better articulated by answering four
guiding climate resilience questions.
• Resilience of what (water supplies, cattle, a species, crops, property)?
• Resilience to what (specific climate change hazards such as increased drought,
heat waves, storms, shifting seasons)?
• Resilience for whom (farmers, women, property owners)?
• Resilience through what (ecosystems services from protected areas, rainwater
harvesting, migration corridors)?
Jordan is an example of a country whose commitment would be strengthened with
greater specificity. Its NDC states Jordan’s intention to enhance “the resilience of
local communities impacted by climate change in areas within and surrounding PAs
(including community-based pilot adaptation projects).” This statement includes
specific target populations (people in and around protected areas), but it does not
mention the climate change hazards these people are facing, nor how ecosystem
services from protected areas can help them to adapt.
4. Integrate the carbon sequestration benefits of
protected and other conserved areas into climate change
mitigation targets.
The world’s protected areas store vast amounts of carbon that are critical to climate
change mitigation. While 67 countries include protected areas in their NDCs, very few
referenced the value they can play in sequestering carbon and avoiding emissions.
Furthermore, a previous WWF analysis of forest sector commitments in NDCs found
insufficient accounting of emissions removals via the land use, land-use change, and
forestry16.
Estimates for Bolivia show that the country’s protected areas currently store about
745 million tons of carbon dioxide—the equivalent of $3.7-14.9 billion US dollars at
international carbon market prices6
. While the country’s NDC briefly refers to the
carbon capture potential of ecosystems, it does not mention protected areas explicitly.
Similarly, Mexico’s protected areas store an estimated 2.2 billion tons of carbon
dioxide (worth more than $34 billion US dollars)6. While its NDC states an intent to
“increase carbon capture [through the] conservation and recovery of coastal and marine
ecosystems such as coral reefs, mangroves, sea grass, and dunes,” Mexico makes no
mention of carbon sequestration by the country’s protected areas.
Given the potential that protected and other conserved areas can play in sequestering
carbon and avoiding emissions, Parties are encouraged to enhance their climate change
mitigation ambition by incorporating the role of protected areas in their revised NDCs,
with specific areas and targets justified by rigorous data analysis.
5. Commit to managing protected and other
conserved areas for current and anticipated climate
risks to ecosystems and biodiversity while calling
attention to the need for increased technical
and financial support to improve protected area
management in the face of rapid change.
Key conservation strategies such as those involving protected areas—which were
designed to reduce the extent of anthropogenic threats to biodiversity—are unlikely
to provide refuge from the expected effects of climate change. Protected areas within
biodiversity hotspots will experience unprecedented climates along with unprotected
hotspot areas.
As Parties increase climate change ambition by using important ecosystem services
provided by protected and other conserved areas, governments should acknowledge
known and anticipated climate change risks to biodiversity and manage them to ensure
continued delivery of carbon sequestration and adaptation services. Every country
should update their protected area management plans to include consideration of
climate change risk. Management plans should reference specific climate change
risks and hazards and climate-adaptive measures should be informed by the best
available science. Climate-informed protected area management, a new frontier for
conservationists, will require increased financial and technical support, particularly in
in the developing world10.
This review of current NDCs shows that climate change risks to nature are not being
fully considered. Although many NDCs include actions that claim to “increase the
adaptive capacity” or “increase the resilience” of protected areas, many actions
described are traditional conservation approaches, and are not specifically designed
to facilitate necessary and unavoidable change as species and ecosystems adapt to the
changing climate. For example, Ethiopia plans to “enhance the adaptive capacity of
ecosystems through an ecosystem rehabilitation approach in the highlands.” Although

there may be instances where a traditional approach to restoration or rehabilitation
may increase ecological resilience, adaptation strategies must be based on climate risk
information. Countries must adopt a forward-looking perspective that moves beyond
restoring past conditions and actively manages protected areas for change.
An illustration of climate-informed conservation comes from Kutai National Park,
Indonesia, where climate change projections indicate a high likelihood of increased
temperatures, which are likely to exacerbate drought conditions and lead to more
frequent wildfires17. To help manage this risk, researchers in Kutai National Park
evaluated 250 different tree species to determine those most resilient to changes in
climate. Reforestation efforts are now underway using two tree species identified as
most resilient to fire events17.
There are examples where countries are managing climate risks to nature but do not
mention this in their NDCs. Pakistan’s National Biodiversity Strategy and Action
Plan states that “with respect to forestry, the National Climate Change Policy outlines
the need to restore and enhance Pakistan’s forest cover under sustainable forest
management to withstand present and probable future impacts of climate change”18.
While this statement does not mention protected areas specifically, actively managing
forests for future climate risks could easily be expanded to include protected areas.
Pakistan does not include this language in its NDC.
Planning for change to ecosystems is vital for the success of nature-based climate
change mitigation solutions. Although some countries mention the mitigation benefits
that protected areas can provide, no NDC considers or proposes managing the risk
that climate change itself may undermine the sequestration potential of natural
systems due to the increasing severity and frequency of fires, droughts, pest outbreaks
and other hazards. Although impacts on forests and other ecosystems important for
carbon sequestration can be significantly reduced if the Paris Agreement’s temperature
stabilization target is achieved, these impacts cannot be eliminated entirely.
Approximately 13% of the planet’s land area is projected to undergo biome shifts at 2°C
of warming and about 7% at 1.5°C. At 2°C warming, 16% of plant species are projected
to lose more than half of their climatically determined geographic range, while 8% will
meet this fate at 1.5°C warming8. Changes to ecosystems that provide climate change
mitigation benefits must be considered in management of natural areas and in how
nature-based mitigation benefits are incorporated into NDC targets.
The same is true for ecosystem-based adaptation. One challenge facing EbA is
identifying limits and thresholds for EbA’s delivery of adaptation benefits, and the
extent to which ecosystems can provide services in a changing climate19. If climate
change risks on ecosystems are not considered and managed, the benefits ecosystems
provide in reducing people’s vulnerability may be short-lived.
Given these challenges, Parties are encouraged to consider climate change risks
to nature and adopt climate-adaptive measures to manage them. These measures
should be included in revised NDCs as well as national commitments to other global
conventions.
CONCLUSION
For the past century, protected areas and other conserved areas such as
indigenous and community conserved areas and natural sacred areas have
been the primary vehicle for biodiversity conservation. In the era of climate
change, protected areas take on new roles by helping the world mitigate the
pace and extent of global warming and reducing vulnerability to the adverse
effects of increased climate variability and longer-term stressors. Revisions to
Nationally Determined Contributions to the UNFCCC Paris Agreement, provide
an important opportunity to increase climate ambitions while highlighting the
role of protected and other conserved areas in contributing to global mitigation
and adaptation targets.
This review of 151 NDCs covering 179 countries identified Parties’ strengths in
utilizing protected and other conserved areas to contribute to their own adaptation
and mitigation goals—even as it revealed significant gaps. Developing countries have
taken the lead in recognizing the value of protected and conserved areas when it comes
to meeting the climate change commitments within their NDCs. Developed nations
can assist these countries by providing technical and financial support, even as they
strengthen their own NDCs by communicating existing efforts or plans to incorporate
protected and conserved areas in achieving climate change targets. All nations must
acknowledge and manage the threats that climate change poses to nature and protected
areas to ensure continued delivery of critical carbon sequestration and adaptation
benefits.
By adopting any or all of the five recommendations emerging from this analysis, Parties
can not only strengthen their contributions to the UNFCCC but also create synergies in
meeting commitments to the United Nations Sustainable Development Goals and the
Convention on Biological Diversity. By doing so, we can help people and nature find a
safer, more resilient path forward in a rapidly changing world.
GLOSSARY
Adaptation: In human systems, the process of adjustment to actual or expected
climate and its effects, in order to moderate harm or exploit beneficial opportunities.
In natural systems, the process of adjustment to actual climate and its effects; human
intervention may facilitate adjustment to expected climate. (Intergovernmental Panel
on Climate Change)
Adaptive capacity: The combination of the strengths, attributes, and resources
available to an individual, community, society, or organization that can be used to
prepare for and undertake actions to reduce adverse impacts, moderate harm, or
exploit beneficial opportunities. (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change)
Carbon sequestration: The process of capturing and storing atmospheric carbon
dioxide. It is one method of reducing the amount of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere
with the goal of reducing global climate change. (USGS)
Convention on Biological Diversity (CBD): The Convention on Biological
Diversity (CBD) entered into force on 29 December 1993. It has 3 main objectives: The
conservation of biological diversity; The sustainable use of the components of biological
diversity; The fair and equitable sharing of the benefits arising out of the utilization
of genetic resources. The CBD was inspired by the world community’s growing
commitment to sustainable development. It represents a dramatic step forward in the
conservation of biological diversity, the sustainable use of its components, and the fair
and equitable sharing of benefits arising from the use of genetic resources. (CBD)
Ecosystem-based adaptation (EbA): Incorporates biodiversity and ecosystem
services into an overall adaptation strategy to help people to adapt to the adverse effects
of climate change. (Convention on Biological Diversity)
Ecosystem services: The benefits people obtain from ecosystems, which have been
classified by the Millennium Ecosystem Assessment as: Supporting services, such as
seed dispersal and soil formation; regulating services, such as carbon sequestration,
climate regulation, water regulation and filtration, and pest control; provisioning
services, such as supply of food, fiber, timber and water; and cultural services, such as
recreational experiences, education and spiritual enrichment (Millennium Ecosystem
Assessment 2005)
Least developed country (LDC): A country that exhibits the lowest indicators of
socioeconomic development, with the lowest Human Development Index ratings of all
countries in the world. (United Nations Economic Analysis & Policy Division)
Mitigation (of climate change): A human intervention to reduce the sources or
enhance the sinks of greenhouse gases. (Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change)
Nationally Determined Contributions (NDCs): The Paris Agreement requests
each country to outline and communicate their post-2020 climate actions, known as
their NDCs. NDCs are submitted every five years to the UNFCCC secretariat. In order to
enhance the ambition over time the Paris Agreement provide that successive NDCs will
represent a progression compared to the previous NDC and reflect its highest possible
ambition. All Parties are requested to submit the next round of NDCs (new NDCs or
updated NDCs) by 2020 and every five years thereafter (e.g. by 2020, 2025, 2030),
regardless of their respective implementation time frames. (UNFCCC)
Nature-based solutions: Actions to protect, sustainably manage, and restore natural
or modified ecosystems, that address societal challenges effectively and adaptively,
simultaneously providing human well-being and biodiversity benefits. (IUCN)
Other conserved areas: In this report “other conserved areas” is used as a proxy
for “Other Effective Area-based Conservation Measures” which is defined as “a
geographically defined area other than a Protected Area, which is governed and
managed in ways that achieve positive and sustained long-term outcomes for the
in situ conservation of biodiversity, with associated ecosystem functions and services
and where applicable, cultural, spiritual, socio—economic, and other locally relevant
values.” (CBD)
Paris Agreement: At COP 21 in Paris, on 12 December 2015, Parties to the UNFCCC
reached a landmark agreement to combat climate change and to accelerate and
intensify the actions and investments needed for a sustainable low carbon future. The
Paris Agreement’s central aim is to strengthen the global response to the threat of
climate change by keeping a global temperature rise this century well below 2 degrees
Celsius above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature
increase even further to 1.5 degrees Celsius. The Paris Agreement requires all Parties
to put forward their best efforts through “nationally determined contributions” (NDCs)
and to strengthen these efforts in the years ahead. (UNFCCC)
Protected area: A clearly defined geographical space, recognized, dedicated and
managed, through legal or other effective means, to achieve the long-term conservation
of nature with associated ecosystem services and cultural values. (IUCN)
REDD+: Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation in developing
countries (REDD+) is a climate change mitigation solution developed by the Parties to
the UNFCCC. REDD+ incentivizes developing countries to keep their forests standing
by offering results-based payments for actions to reduce or remove forest carbon
emissions. (UNFCCC)
Resilience: The ability of a social-ecological system to absorb and recover from shocks
and disturbances, maintain functionality and services by adapting to chronic stressors,
and transform when necessary (WWF)
Small Island Developing States (SIDS): A distinct group of developing countries
facing specific social, economic and environmental vulnerabilities. SIDS tend to
confront similar constraints in their sustainable development efforts, such as a narrow
resource base depriving them of the benefits of economies of scale; small domestic
markets and heavy dependence on a few external and remote markets; high costs for
energy, infrastructure, transportation, communication and servicing; long distances
from export markets and import resources; low and irregular international traffic
volumes; little resilience to natural disasters; growing populations; high volatility of
economic growth; limited opportunities for the private sector and a proportionately
large reliance of their economies on their public sector; and fragile natural
environments. (United Nations)
United Nations Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs): The Sustainable
Development Goals are the blueprint to achieve a better and more sustainable future
for all. They address the global challenges we face, including those related to poverty,
inequality, climate, environmental degradation, prosperity, and peace and justice. The
Goals interconnect and in order to leave no one behind, it is important that we achieve
each Goal and target by 2030. (United Nations)
United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC):
The UNFCCC entered into force on 21 March 1994. Today, it has near-universal
membership. The 197 countries that have ratified the Convention are called Parties to
the Convention. The ultimate objective of the Convention is to stabilize greenhouse
gas concentrations “at a level that would prevent dangerous anthropogenic (human
induced) interference with the climate system.” It states that “such a level should
be achieved within a time-frame sufficient to allow ecosystems to adapt naturally
to climate change, to ensure that food production is not threatened, and to enable
economic development to proceed in a sustainable manner.” (United Nations)


WWF STRONGLY ENCOURAGES
PARTIES TO CONSIDER THE MYRIAD
BENEFITS THAT NATURE PROVIDES
TO PEOPLE AND TO THE CLIMATE
AND EMPHASIZE THE IMPORTANCE
OF NATURE CONSERVATION IN
THEIR REVISED NDCS.
