 COMPANIES, Thursday, December 15, 2016 471 mots, p. 15

Disclose climate change impact, urges report

Insurance
By Oliver Ralph in London

A task force led by Michael Bloomberg and backed by Mark Carney has urged companies to disclose to investors the impact of climate change on their businesses.

The billionaire media owner and Mr Carney, the governor of the Bank of England, are behind new recommendations designed to give investors, lenders and insurers a better idea about how climate change will affect individual businesses.

Their report comes amid a possible challenge to global efforts to combat climate change. Donald Trump, a climate change sceptic, moves into the White House next month and could pull the US out of the Paris climate change agreement. The president-elect has already appointed Scott Pruitt, a fellow sceptic, as head of the US Environmental Protection Agency.

Last year Mr Carney, in his role as chair of the Financial Stability Board, asked Mr Bloomberg to lead a task force that would examine the threats and opportunities presented by climate change. Yesterday the group, called the Task Force on Climate Related Financial Disclosures, published its suggestions.

Mr Bloomberg said: "Climate change is not only an environmental problem but a business one as well. We need business leaders to join us to help spread these recommendations across their industries in order to help make markets more efficient and economies more stable, resilient and sustainable."

The task force wants companies' financial reports to include a discussion of the impact of climate change scenarios and the carbon-reducing policies that are designed to combat them.

Although the FSB cannot force companies to adopt the recommendations, it hopes that they will become common practice across a wide range of sectors.

Mr Carney said: "The disclosure recommendations will give financial markets the information they need to manage risks, and seize opportunities, stemming from climate change. The task force has focused on the practical, material disclosures investors want and which all capital-raising companies can compile."

More than 30 organisations, including Aviva, Axa, BHP Billiton, JPMorgan and Daimler, have publicly come out in support of the project.

Thomas Buberl , chief executive of Axa, said: "As an insurance company, Axa is directly impacted by climate change and - as a major global investor - we are also able to foster adjustment so that climate-related risks are better taken into account among the diverse companies we work with and invest in."

However, there is some scepticism about the impact of the report. Client Earth, a pressure group, said companies could use the recommendations to avoid their legal obligations.

Alice Garton, ClientEarth senior lawyer, said: "A company's legal duty to disclose material risks is clear and this duty applies equally to climate risk.

"These recommendations should set the standard for compliance with these existing laws. It is already evident that financial regulators are not providing adequate oversight of climate-related risk disclosures and enforcement."
