 Tuesday, November 8, 2016 - 23:10Z 448 mots

MDBs will need to scale up climate finance

Sir, You rightly refer to the urgency to act on climate change and to the important role of multilateral development banks (MDBs) in mobilising finance to help countries address the threats posed by climate change in developing countries ("Focus on Marrakesh to limit global warming", editorial, October 29).

While sustainable infrastructure will command a large share of the $100bn a year that MDBs committed to last October, other key investments will need to be made in areas such as biodiversity, forestry and agriculture.

The latest reports from the New Climate Economy and the Centre for Global Development highlight this role as well as underscoring the comparative advantages of MDBs, given our country and regional knowledge, technical capacity, operational expertise, convening power, and role as trusted partner and honest broker both with public and private sector clients.

Long before the Paris Agreement, we at the Inter-American Development Bank Group were engaged in adjusting our organisational structure, systems and processes to better address the challenges that the climate finance agenda implies, particularly to mobilise private sector investors and long-term finance.

In addition to having climate change at the heart of our updated institutional strategy, in 2015 we set out the goal of doubling our climate-related finance by 2020. Last month I also announced a new initiative, called NDC Invest, that will align resources from across the IDB Group to provide governments and the private sector with the support they need to deliver their nationally determined contributions under the Paris agreement.

However, there is a further need for scaling up the availability of concessional climate finance through instruments such as the Green Climate Fund, the Climate Investment Funds, and bilateral funds such as the Canadian Climate Fund.

Furthermore, delivering the staggering scale of investment that is needed not only for climate finance but also for the broader 2030 Sustainable Development Agenda will require financing well beyond what MDBs can provide today, even fully leveraging their current capital.

We have all implemented most of the measures called for by the Group of 20 to optimise our balance sheets to maximise the use of our capital. However, there is a risk that any gains from this process will be lost, given potential changes in how some rating agencies assess our portfolio risk. Capital increases will be needed in the near term in order for the MDBs to be able to fully and effectively support their borrowing member countries to deliver on the 2030 agenda. 