 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR, Thursday, November 17, 2016 371 mots, p. 8

Climate change: picture is not quite so bleak

Sir, Nick Butler (" Climate change: time for adaptation to reality ", FT.com, November 14) is correct in saying that the Paris agreement, significant though it is, does not "solve" climate change. A "solution" needs concrete moves by governments to cut emissions - an issue that the election of Donald Trump necessarily clouds.

Elsewhere, Professor Butler's analysis is a little behind the times. The use of coal in growing emerging economies does not look set, as he suggests, to "outpace anything being achieved elsewhere". As the Financial Times reports this week, global CO2 emissions have stayed almost flat for three years in a row now, despite global economic growth. This is largely down to a decline in emissions from coal-burning in China, the most important emerging economy of all. Recent government edicts that have virtually halted approval of planned coal-fired power stations and suspended some midway through construction are likely to accelerate the trend.

In India, as US research initiative CoalSwarm has shown, only one in six planned coal-fired power stations reaches completion - and the usage rate of new plants is going down, trimming the economic viability still further. India's energy minister recently observed that solar power is now cheaper than coal-fired generation in his country. The International Energy Agency, as it recently admitted, has a history of underestimating the pace at which renewable energy advances, and the forensic, plant-by-plant approach methodology used by CoalSwarm is likely to be a far more accurate guide to the future than the IEA's modelling.

In the US itself, even if Mr Trump does secede from the Paris agreement, does anyone seriously think that four years of changed political rhetoric will magically make new coal mines or new coal-fired power stations investable - especially when many states such as California are pursuing their own ambitious clean energy plans?

Prof Butler is right in arguing that reducing emissions on the timescale indicated by science is profoundly difficult, and that some degree of adaptation will be needed (as is explicitly acknowledged in the Paris agreement). But real-world evidence indicates the picture is not as bleak as he claims.

Richard Black

Director,

Energy and Climate Intelligence Unit, 