 Wednesday, November 4, 2020 • 12:00Z Financial Times (web site) • 1738 words US election: What it means for climate change and ESG 

Gillian Tett, Billy Nauman, Patrick Temple-West, Alex Newman and Oliver Telling 


Welcome to Moral Money. US election's impact on climate and ESG Today we have: EU looks to expand green taxonomy Trump admin guts anti-ESG pension rule UK companies' dilemma over dividends Climate and ESG on the ballot We may not know who won the US election yet, but we do have a good idea of what either outcome would mean for US climate policy and ESG investing. Here's what we know. If Donald Trump stays in office, it would be terrible news for climate change. As Martin Wolf wrote: "The coming decades will determine whether the threat of damaging and irreversible change is averted, or not. Without active US engagement, success seems inconceivable." Under a second Trump term, it is safe to assume the US will not engage at a federal level. That's very bad. But (at risk of sounding Pollyanna-ish), things could be worse. deteriorating status as a global hegemony. Europe has remained committed to decarbonisation through the pandemic. And as we have seen in recent weeks, China, Japan and South Korea have set their own net zero pledges. Sceptics have questioned the seriousness of these plans, but the direction of travel is clear. By dropping out of Paris, Mr Trump did not inspire other countries to shirk their climate responsibility but instead made Europe the de facto standard setter. There is still the problem of the US itself. It is the world's second-largest emitter and must transition away from fossil fuels. The rest of the world could try to push the US to clean up, but it is hard to see that having much effect. States such as California are taking steps to curb carbon that will have ramifications extending far beyond their borders (such as banning the sale of new fossil fuel powered cars). And Mr Trump's failed attempt to resurrect the US coal industry shows that there are limits to what he can do. But his deregulatory agenda, which has been calamitous for the environment, will probably only speed up under a second term. A Trump win would also likely impede bipartisan market-based climate plans such as a carbon tax (or dividend). For starters it is clear that Mr Trump's decision to back out of the Paris accord only served to further undercut the US's Under Joe Biden , it would be a different story. He has promised to rejoin Paris immediately and enact a sweeping climate plan that would earmark $2tn for new clean energy projects. He has also threatened to impose a federal drilling ban that would significantly curtail US oil production. National (or global) carbon pricing would also be on the table. But it is unclear how his administration would follow through on his campaign rhetoric or the degree to which Mr Biden would rely on market incentives or regulation to fight climate change. The Democrats also must win the Senate (which looks unlikely) if he is going to get anything done. As it stands now, the oil industry is not overly worried. A Biden win might make it "conceivable" that the world can avoid irreversible climate damage as Martin Wolf put it but it is no guarantee. A Biden presidency also would auger well for the sustainable investing industry. It is possible that a Democratic administration would set up some regulatory standards on environmental, social and governance disclosures similar to the EU's non-financial reporting directive and green taxonomy. This would be welcome for investors and companies. Regulation is a "missing piece" of the ESG puzzle right now, said Vikram Gandhi , professor at Harvard Business School. But even without regulatory oversight, US investors are already pushing for better, more standardised, so-called "non-financial" information disclosure and there's no reason to think that will stop. No matter what happens in the election it is unlikely that the growth of ESG would slow down. Despite hostility toward responsible investing in the Trump administration, it has done little to stop its expansion ( see Patrick TempleWest's piece below for more ). investing at "I think people are starting to realise that ESG is simply the new quality factor," said Martin Jarzebowski , director of investment responsible manager Federated Hermes. "When you're evaluating any of these different companies, and you're focused on what's relevant and what's financially material, it's just a natural extension of the primary research that any good active fundamental investors should be doing." ( Billy Nauman ) UK companies' dilemma dividend payment Here's a moral conundrum for C-suites in the era of Covid-19: should companies that used furlough support schemes refund taxpayers before restarting dividends? Some believe they should. This week, London-listed kitchen supplier Howden Joinery committed to repay the £22m it received from the UK government's Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme. Shareholder pay will only be considered once the company has caught up on its local tax bills and deferred pension contributions. Howden Joinery joins a growing list of blue-chips including house-builder Taylor Wimpey , engineer Weir Group and bookmaker William Hill , whose improving fortunes have prompted them to return emergency funds taken during the pandemic's first wave. Others have taken a different tack. A review of public documents and comments by FT sister title Investors Chronicle found at least 10 FTSE 350 companies that accessed furlough support schemes during the pandemic have since declared £877m or more in dividends despite keeping (or only partially repaying) the wage subsidies' economic benefit. Advertiser WPP , listed private equity firm 3i and building materials company CRH are among the dividend-paying multinationals that have not paid back all furlough support claimed by their businesses subsidiaries. or wholly-owned In doing so, the companies have not broken any conditions attached to the wage subsidies, though the UK government has now said it expects large employers to renounce dividend payments when using its new job support scheme. That highlights the challenge for businesses eager to take all available state help amid a second round of lockdowns all while keeping civil society and long-term dividend investors onside. ( Alex Newman and Oliver Telling ) An EU rainbow taxonomy? Europe's green taxonomy might soon embrace more colours, given the hints emerging from European Commission officials. On Tuesday Marcel Haag , head of the commission's directorate for growth, jobs and investment, told the Financial Times that social factors would soon be incorporated into environmental reporting. "The success of the climate transition depends on our ability to make this a just transition," he told the FT's Investing for Good summit in Europe. "ESG is not limited to environmental issues. We created it starting out focusing on green economy and environmental objectives, but now is the time to look into the social dimension." Mr Haag added that the commission has asked its 50 stakeholders to play a role in factoring "social aspects into our taxonomy". This shift might make some critics wince, given how hard it is to define let alone measure social factors compared with, say, carbon emissions. But ever since the gilets jaunes protests in France against fossil fuel tax hikes, European politicians have been worrying about how to balance issues of equity and social inclusion with environmental reform. The Covid-19 recession is intensifying this. Expect to hear a lot more about this winter; whether or not it sparks a multicoloured taxonomy. ( Gillian Tett ) transition" "just Trump's ESG rule: More bark than bite Asset managers scored a win at the US labor department on Friday over a regulation aimed at limiting the scope of ESG investing in private pension plans. The final version of the widely criticised rule removed ESG language specifically, and broadly requires pension advisers to select investments based on financial factors something they are largely required to do already. With the final rule, the labor department (headed by Eugene Scalia , pictured above ) opted "to no longer focus on ESG funds at all," said Joshua Lichtenstein , a partner at Ropes & Gray. Another lawyer following the rule put it more bluntly: the labor department "gutted its own rule". Still, the rule has a chilling effect and will discourage companies from adding ESG funds to their retirement savings plans. Only a tiny number of US compa Smart reads that China's announcement it will be carbon neutral by 2060 is one of the most important climate stories of the year, but a closer look at the country's coal "addiction" raises questions about how it will actually achieve its goal and whether its government can be trusted as a climate leader. (FT) Sign up to Swamp Notes, our newsletter on US politics and power, to receive our special post-election edition on Wednesday afternoon. Further reading Australia's banks stop funding coal as trading partners decarbonise (FT) GSK/ESG funds: Lex) flower power (FT VW within '1 gramme' of compliance with EU carbon targets (FT) Climate change: how China can achieve its pledge of zero emissions (FT) AllianceBernstein Takes Global Position on Modern Slavery, Climate Change (FundFire) South Korea joins Japan in making 2050 carbon-neutral pledge (Nikkei Asia) Australian super fund agrees to factor climate crisis into decisions in 'groundbreaking' case (The Guardian) nies offer ESG funds in their retirement plans, the labor department said. "This does nothing to encourage ESG analysis," said Aron Szapiro , head of policy research at Morningstar. "It still makes it very difficult to include sustainability factors" in an investment strategy. ( Patrick Temple-West ) Chart of the week Co-operation among the world's five largest emitters is key to controlling climate change. But, as Martin Wolf notes, it looks unlikely that China, the US, the EU, India and Japan will band together to curb emissions. Grit in the oyster While many companies are taking extraordinary steps to pitch in for the greater good, the story. Here's a little corporate grit in the oyster. is only part of that Shell's plan to transition to clean energy is a key part of its marketing strategy but a recent attempt to bolster its self-styled green image on Twitter blew up in its face as US congresswoman Alexandria Ocasio-Cortez , Swedish climate activist Greta Thunberg , and thousands of others blasted the oil major after it asked people what they were "willing to change to help reduce emissions". "I sure am willing to call out the fossil fuel companies for knowingly destroying future living conditions for countless generations for profit and then trying to distract people and prevent real systemic change through endless greenwash campaigns," Ms Thunberg wrote. (The Guardian)  