 News, Thursday, December 19, 2019 509 mots, p. 3

Norway snubs green calls to leave oil reserves in the ground

Climate change
RICHARD MILNE — OSLO

Norway will continue to pump oil as long as there is demand, the outgoing oil minister has said, resisting growing environmental calls for Europe's biggest petroleum producer to leave its substantial reserves in the ground.

More than 50 per cent of Norway's reserves are yet to be tapped and Oslo would continue to encourage companies to drill for them, said Kjell-Borge Freiberg, who resigned yesterday to be replaced by a politician known for her scepticism about climate change.

"We will be a supplier as long as there is demand for oil and gas ... There will be demand for oil and not least gas for a long, long, long time ahead," he said, speaking ahead of the 50th anniversary of the discovery of oil in Norway on December 23, an event he described as its equivalent of the moon landing.

"In the same way the Americans landed on the moon in 1969, so we in Norway found oil. It made us the nation that we are. It built this country," he said, adding that living standards had risen over the past half-century to exceed those of Switzerland.

With the centre-right coalition government pushing green policies such as greater use of electric cars and carbon storage, Oslo is facing increasing questions about its status as western Europe's largest oil producer. Environmentalists argue that to reach the Paris climate accord's targets of a big cut in global greenhouse gas emissions, much of Norway's oil must be left in the ground.

"Who should be the first movers in leaving oil in the ground? There's no country better equipped than Norway," said Silje Lundberg, the head of the Norwegian Society for the Conservation of Nature.

Norway's "smart" decision to plough its petroleum revenues into a $1tn sovereign wealth fund, which owns an average 1.4 per cent of the shares of every listed company worldwide, leaves it well placed for the future, she added.

Mr Freiberg rejected the idea. "The answer is no," he answered. His replacement will be the controversial Sylvi Listhaug from the populist Progress party, who is well-known for her remarks in 2011 that man-made emissions do not lead to climate change. Still, with growing consumer concern about climate change, the political mood in Norway is shifting. The opposition Labour party has dropped a push to start an exploration study for petroleum around the picturesque Lofoten islands and has opened up the debate on Norway's generous tax regime for explorers. Mr Freiberg said that Norway was a "relatively small" oil producer with 2 per cent of the world's supply and that it would be "consumers who determine how quickly energy use will change", not producers. Its oil sector will also receive a boost in January when its largest field in three decades, the Johan Sverdrup project, opens officially with an expected lifetime of about 50 years.

Ms Lundberg said that Norway's insistence on maintaining its petroleum industry flew in the face of its commitments under the Paris pact.
