  Sunday, February 16, 2014  
Financial Times (FT.com) • 407 words
  John Kerry warns on catastrophic climate change 
 By Ben Bland in Jakarta 


 John Kerry, US secretary of state,  has called on industrialised and developing nations to work together "urgently" to reduce carbon emissions if the world is to avoid the catastrophic impact of climate change.  Speaking in Jakarta, the Indonesian capital, on Sunday, Mr Kerry said that while industrialised nations, including the US, were responsible for much of the carbon emissions that are believed to cause climate change, developing nations did not have a "free pass" to follow the same path of development.  "They don't have a right to go out and repeat the mistakes of the past," he said. "It's not enough for one country or even a few countries to reduce their emissions when other countries continue to fill the atmosphere with carbon pollution as they see fit. At the end of the day, emissions coming from anywhere in the world threaten the future of people everywhere in the world."  Mr Kerry, who is on a three-country tour of Asia to call for action on climate change and seek to ease maritime tensions in the region, is hoping to spur progress toward a stringent global deal to cut emissions through a series of bilateral agreements with major emitting nations such as China.  In Beijing on Saturday, he signed an agreement with China for the world's  two biggest economies to share information and discuss policies ahead of next year's UN climate change negotiations, that are meant to lay out the path for a new global agreement on climate change mitigation.  "I'm pleased to tell you that the leaders of China agree that it is time to pursue a cleaner path forward," said Mr Kerry, noting that China and the US together account for 40 per cent of global emissions. "We have hopes that this unique partnership between China and the US can help set an example for global leadership and global seriousness."  Although the Obama administration has tried to push climate change mitigation up the domestic political agenda, it has faced heavy opposition from those who dispute both the cause of the phenomenon and arguments about the scale of the damage it will cause.  Mr Kerry hit out at these critics, saying that 97 per cent of scientists who have examined the issue agree that climate change is a real threat.     Indonesia, which is a major emitter of carbon because of rampant deforestation, is one the large emerging nations that is struggling to a find a balance between curbing emissions and promoting economic growth.  Mr Kerry said that people in Indonesia and elsewhere had to pressure their governments to act now before it is too late.  "It is not a lack of ability that is a problem, it is a lack of political resolve that is standing in our way," he said. "Today I call on all of you in Indonesia and concerned citizens around the world to demand the resolve that is necessary from your leaders."    