  Thursday, February 27, 2014  Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 5 • 402 words
  Canberra marked down for reversal of climate change law  Globe report
  By Pilita Clark in London 

 The Australian government has  taken an unscientific approach to climate change that is "so unintellectual as to be unacceptable", a prominent British Conservative peer has claimed.  "Australia is very disappointing," said Lord Deben, a former chairman of the UK Conservative party and ex-cabinet minister who heads Globe International , a legislator body that annually assesses laws to combat climate change.  The conservative Australian government led by Tony Abbott, prime minister, is singled out in the latest Globe report today for being the only one of 66 countries studied that tried to repeal national climate legislation in the past year.  The 66 account for nearly 90 per cent of global greenhouse gas emissions. Eight passed flagship climate legislation last year while 19 made what Globe calls "positive advances". A total of 487 climate laws have been passed worldwide, up from fewer than 100 in 2002 and less than 40 in 1997.  The Globe report comes as two of the world's most authoritative scientific bodies the US National Academy of Sciences and the UK's Royal Society took the unprecedented step of publish ing a simple explanation of what they say is "the clear evidence that humans are causing the climate to change".  The document, available on their websites, addresses the highly polarised debate about climate change in many countries.  In the four years since Globe started charting worldwide climate change legislation, only Canada, and now Australia, had reversed significant laws, the report's authors said.  Japan may follow suit after declaring a shutdown of its nuclear plants in the wake of the 2011 Fukushima disaster had made its previous climate targets impossible to meet.  The Abbott government began moving to dismantle the carbon tax and other measures introduced under the previous Labor government shortly after winning power in September.  It aims to replace them with a new scheme to cut greenhouse gas emissions at a lower cost, but Lord Deben characterised its attitude as a "reversal".  "I think it's the last flourish of the dismisses," said the peer, who was known as John Gummer when he was a minister in the governments of Margaret Thatcher and John Major.    He said Mr Abbott relied on the "very dubious" work of a small minority of climate analysts and this was "the last example of a government coming to power on the basis that really all this is nonsense".  For Australia to repeal climate measures when it had just recorded its hottest year on record was startling, he said in a Financial Times interview: "It's so unintellectual as to be unacceptable, I mean it is just amazing."  Only four of the 66 countries in Globe's report lack climate legislation: Canada, Saudi Arabia, Venezuela and the United Arab Emirates. But some Canadian provinces have plans, and Saudi Arabia has ambitious solar energy schemes.  The study acknowledges, that the hundreds of laws passed so far will not limit greenhouse gas emissions enough to prevent a 2C rise in global temperatures.  