  Wednesday, February 26, 2014  Financial Times (FT.com) • 362 words 
 Climate change one of 'most serious threats' we face, says Cameron 
 By Pilita Clark, Environment Correspondent 


 Man-made climate change is  among the greatest threats confronting the world, David Cameron declared on Wednesday, as prominent members of his party launched a drive to reclaim the environment as a Conservative political issue.  Pressed in the House of Commons to explain why he was happy to have "climate change deniers" in his cabinet, the prime minister gave one of his most forthright statements yet on the risks posed by global warming.  "I believe man-made climate change is one of the most serious threats that this country and this world faces," he said, a comment that jars with the beliefs of some Tory party members who question the dangers posed by a changing climate.  Nigel Lawson, the former chancellor, and Peter Lilley, Conservative MP, are among those who share such views and it is often claimed that Owen Paterson, the environment secretary, agrees with them.  However, Mr Paterson is one of 14 contributors to a booklet launched at Westminster on Wednesday by the Conservative Environment Network, a body that argues it is wrong to equate environmentalism with the left.  Other contributors include education secretary, Michael Gove; Kathryn Murdoch, wife of Rupert Murdoch's son, James; former New York City mayor Michael Bloomberg and Unilever chief executive, Paul Polman.  Mr Gove, who was last year accused of allowing climate change to be downgraded in the national schools curriculum, told the launch event that it was clear that man has an impact on the climate and "unarguable" that climate change can have a "devastating and wrenching impact on societies".  He added that Conservative leaders had long sought to protect the natural environment, from Anthony Eden's Clean Air Act to the drive against sulphur emissions led by Margaret Thatcher, also a vigorous backer of climate research.  However, Tory backbencher, Zac Goldsmith, said it would be dishonest to ignore the fact that this momentum had slowed, largely because of what he said was the "unhelpful rhetoric we're seeing at all levels of the party".  His brother, financier Ben Goldsmith, who chairs the network, told the Financial Times that he believed climate change deniers were becoming a dwindling minority as the science grew more or less indisputable.   "If Nigel Lawson was told the aeroplane he was about to board had a 5 per cent or 10 per cent or 15 per cent chance of crashing, he wouldn't board it," he said.  "So the idea of purchasing an insurance policy [against climate change] is becoming more and more obvious to people and moreover, more and more people are realising it's not actually a purchase, it's an investment that is going to yield us a financial return so I think the climate argument is going to win itself."   