The Guardian (UK) Friday, May 23, 2014 - 00:01 UTC -0400Collapse of ice sheet could cause devastation to global food supplySuzanne GoldenbergThe current collapse of a large part of the Antarctic ice sheet could devastate global food supply, drowning vast areas of crop lands across the Middle East and Asia, according to research.The report, Advancing Global Food Supply in the Face of a Changing Climate, urges the Obama administration to step up research funding - especially in developing countries - to help make up a projected gap in future food supply.It also warns America's corn belt could face yield declines of more than 25% by mid-century unless there are new advances in agriculture to compensate for higher temperatures, changing rainfall and more aggressive weeds and pests under climate change.The report, due to be released in Washington, is the first to factor in the effects of the slow-motion collapse of the Western Antarctic ice sheet on future food security.Two independent studies last week warned the retreat of the Western Antarctic ice sheet was unstoppable and could lead to a sea-level rise of up to four metres over the coming centuries.Those rising seas would displace millions of people from low-lying coastal areas and wipe out rice-growing areas across Asia, Gerald Nelson, a University of Illinois economist and author of the report, said."That sea-level rise would take out half of Bangladesh and mostly wipe out productive rice regions in Vietnam," Nelson told the Guardian. "It would have a major effect on Egyptian agricultural areas."The projected degree of sea-level rise poses a far greater threat to future food supply even than that envisaged in the United Nations' IPCC report in March, Nelson said."A sea level rise of three metres over the next 100 years is much more likely than the IPCC thought possible," the report said.In terms of absolute land loss, China would be at risk of losing more than 3 million hectares. Vietnam, India, Bangladesh and Myanmar could lose more than 1 million hectares, the report said.The potential loss of viable crop land underscores the urgent need for new technologies to increase agricultural productivity to keep pace with a growing world population, the report said."Agriculture is a huge worldwide industry that requires stable weather 'or else', and we might just be entering the 'or else' period," said Dan Glickman, agriculture secretary under Bill Clinton."The question is, are we doing the right kind of research at our universities, at the department of agriculture, or in the private sector to deal with those changes? That is the real challenge for scientists."