he Guardian (UK) Friday, April 11, 2014 - 00:01 UTC -0400Desmond Tutu calls for boycott against fossil fuel industry: Archbishop calls for anti-apartheid-style campaign: Intervention days ahead of UN Climate Change reportDamian Carrington and Suzanne GoldenbergArchbishop Desmond Tutu has called for an anti-apartheid-style boycott and disinvestment campaign against the fossil fuel industry for driving global warming, days ahead of a landmark UN report on how carbon emissions can be slashed.In an article for the Guardian, the archbishop writes: "We live in a world dominated by greed. We have allowed the interests of capital to outweigh the interests of human beings and our Earth. It is clear [the companies] are not going to give up; they stand to make too much money."Tutu, one of the most revered figures of South Africa's anti-apartheid struggle, says: "People of conscience need to break their ties with corporations financing the injustice of climate change. We can, for instance, boycott events . . . sponsored by fossil-fuel energy companies."The Nobel peace prize winner also called for investors to dump their fossil fuel stocks: "It makes no sense to invest in companies that undermine our future."The archbishop's intervention, just before the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change report, due out on Sunday, is the strongest yet in a rapidly growing global campaign against oil, gas and coal firms that is uniting anti-global warming activists with financial institutions who want to avoid a trillion-dollar crash in fossil fuel stocks.A leaked draft of the IPCC report states that, to avoid dangerous levels of warming, the rising investment in fossil fuel extraction and power plants needs to switch into reverse, dropping by $30bn a year until 2030, if carbon emissions are to be cut sufficiently to limit climate change to 2C. The draft says emissions of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gasses grew nearly twice as fast over the last decade as in the previous 30 years. Emissions grew 2.2% a year on average from 2000-2010, compared to 1.3% a year over the period from 1970-2010. In 2010-2011 global emissions from burning fossil fuels grew 3%.The report states that the rapid rate of greenhouse emissions is pushing the world closer to an era of runaway climate change. Tutu says, however, that a divestment campaign has begun. It started 18 months ago in the US. And it has grown faster than campaigns that targeted apartheid, tobacco and arms manufacturers, according to Oxford University research.In the UK campaigners are targeting the pounds 5bn of fossil fuels stocks owned by UK universities and, last month, top doctors called for urgent divestment. Fossil fuel firms are also facing pressure from investors, with some large pension funds having already divested. The world's biggest sovereign wealth fund, itself built on oil and gas revenues, is now formally considering dumping its fossil fuel stocks.