 WORLD NEWS, Friday, June 13, 2008 305 mots, p. 6

By Andrew Bounds in Brussels

France is recruiting Europe's top climate change diplomat as it prepares to preside over the European Union from next month.

Mogens Peter Carl, who as head of the European Commission's environment directorate spearheaded EU efforts to combat global warming and reduce fossil fuel use, has agreed to join the staff of Jean-Louis Borloo, French environment minister, as a special representative.

Mr Carl will be seen in Paris as a vital addition to Mr Borloo's team. The minister has spent little time in Brussels but has responsibility for one of the most substantial dossiers of the EU presidency.

France would tap Mr Carl's expertise and network of contacts as it pushes through an ambitious programme on the environment during its six-month presidency, which starts on July 1.

This includes reducing emissions from cars, extending the emissions trading scheme and setting targets for renewable energy use.

But his appointment has yet to be sanctioned by José Manuel Barroso, Commission president.

Some diplomats said Mr Barroso was not happy about losing such a key figure when the Commission was involved in bruising debates with member states about how far and fast to cut emissions from cars, aircraft and other important industrial sectors. It is rare for senior eurocrats to join a national civil service.

Mr Barroso's spokesman said: "He is not blocking anything." Terming it an "unusual request", he said the procedure was following its course.

A spokeswoman for Mr Borloo said she expected Mr Carl to take up the post soon, praising his expertise.

Mr Carl's appointment would alarm some European governments.

The Dane is a backer of a French plan to exempt heavy industry such as steel and chemical makers from its cap-and-trade carbon emission system. This could come through giving heavy industry a limited number of free permits to pollute or, more controversially, by forcing importers of such goods to buy permits.

Mr Carl, a trade specialist, was moved sideways to the environment directorate in 2005 after clashing with his political boss, Peter Mandelson, the trade commissioner. The Dane was dubbed "Darth Vader" by US trade negotiators for his aggressive style,

Mr Carl, who has a French wife and speaks the language fluently, has declined to comment on his proposed move.

Additional reporting by Tali Yahalom in Lo