 FT REPORT - FUND MANAGEMENT, Monday, March 24, 2008 613 mots, p. 06

Investment is key in climate change battle
By Kevin Parker

Until recently, it was remarkably difficult for ordinary investors to put their own money behind the fight against global warming. Mutual funds, most people's investment vehicle of choice, offered few options.

That has changed thanks to government legislation and a new awareness among many of the world's investment professionals that climate change is an opportunity, not a threat. In a little more than two years, we estimate retail investors all over the world have pumped around $66bn (£33bn, €42bn) into more than 200 newly launched mutual funds and exchange traded funds investing in companies that help to mitigate or adapt to climate change.

This is a mere drop in the ocean of the $26,000bn held globally in mutual funds of all kinds. But that just emphasises how much further climate change investing can and, indeed, must go as the world economy reshapes itself to adapt to the greenhouse effect.

Government regulation makes the rules and can set the world on the path of change but ultimately it will be the alignment with business that will drive the process forward. This is where the fund management industry will play a central, transformative role.

On the one hand, it must raise the awareness of retail and institutional investors on the issues of climate change, both scientific and economic. Better informed investors are the key to unlocking a potentially vast store of capital.

Two things stand out about the money that has flowed into climate change funds so far. One is that the response so far has been strongly retail. The other is that a mere $55m of the money invested in new funds has come from the US. In short, the institutional and US markets have as yet hardly entered the fray.

On the other hand, the fund management industry will be chiefly responsible for mobilising and funnelling capital towards those companies that are engaged in adapting to or mitigating climate change. Fund managers will be guided not by their individual whims but by the imperative of producing healthy investment returns.

While climate change began as an ethical issue, the impact of government regulation and corporate business decisions is turning it into a major economic force.

At Deutsche Asset Management, we see it as an economic theme with associated "green" attributes - not the other way around. It will be a large enough economic force for the foreseeable future to lead to market information inefficiencies and offers significant alpha opportunities for those investors who can discern the trend.

So where do we expect to find these opportunities? Investors have recently paid a lot of attention to renewable energy technologies such as wind and solar.

For a total solution to global warming, those technologies will have to be perfected but they still have a very long way to go and they tend to be expensive - high risk, in other words. That's shown through in the volatility and fanciful valuations of some companies in this sector, prompting dire warnings of a "bubble" in climate change investing. It's more accurate to regard it as the inevitable ups and downs of a new market, particularly where capital can at times chase the speculative end of the spectrum.

We believe that the less risky area for investors, at least in the near term, is the wide range of existing, tested and often low-cost technologies. Most of them fall under the heading of "improved efficiency"; building insulation, fuel efficiency in lighting systems, air-conditioning, water heating, and so on.

To take one example, the Clinton Climate Initiative has pointed out that buildings contribute about 40 per cent of the world's carbon emissions, and about 70 per cent of the emissions of major cities such as London and New York. Action will have to be taken to reduce this output. That will create a potentially explosive market for investors in the known technologies required to improve buildings' carbon footprint.

The fact that most of these technologies are relatively low cost compared with trendier technologies such as most renewable energy and carbon capture is a bonus because this is where cost-conscious governments will focus first.

Moderate cost plus simplicity will encourage their use through government regulation.

That does not mean it will always be simple to identify alpha. Many of the industry themes are global but local and regional variations are likely to be large.

Different conditions and regulations in different countries will produce specific local opportunities. It will take the resources of professional asset managers to find them. 