 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR, Saturday, April 26, 2008 292 mots, p. 8

A Green New Deal could tackle credit and climate crises

From Caroline Lucas MEP and Mr Colin Hines.

Sir, Your editorial "Climate policy must be credible" (April 19/20) is far too gloomy about the potential for the credit crunch to displace environmental concerns. This financial crisis could be turned into a massive opportunity to tackle climate change.

As the debt-induced deflation beginning to be experienced turns into rapidly rising unemployment, predictions from the likes of the International Monetary Fund and economist Joseph Stiglitz that this could be the worst crisis since the Depression will gain credence.

The logical next response is to see what can be relearned from Roosevelt's New Deal. In a forthcoming report we and a group of finance and environmental experts will propose a "Green New Deal". This would fund the infrastructure needed to tackle today's great global threat - climate change - starting with a programme to make every building in the UK energy-efficient.

A proportion of the net savings from lower energy bills could then be used to repay the public and private sector investment needed. In addition to the public purse, pensions and other savings could provide such funding, channelled for example through local authority bonds. In the US there is a $2,000bn municipal bond market, and in the UK, Transport for London recently raised £600m using such bond issues to help improve the capital's rail system.

New jobs and business opportunities would come in the wake of such a national initiative. It would need to be augmented by the training of a "carbon army", with skills ranging from energy finance and analysis, large-scale engineering for combined heat and power projects, through to draft-stripping and loft-lagging.

Such a "Green New Deal" would combine politicians' desire to be business friendly, with a solution to the urgent quest for labour-intensive solutions, as unemployment rises. This approach would help tackle both the credit crunch and climate change. In this way Gordon Brown could preside over a revived economy, while setting a practical example for the international community.

Caroline Lucas,

Green party MEP for south-east England

Colin Hines,

European Parliament,

Brussels, Belgium
