 LEADER, Monday, March 17, 2008 343 mots, p. Page 8

Climate protection Europe must be bolder to tackle global warming

On the tortuous road to saving the planet from climate change, one traffic rule stands out. Drivers who speed risk paying a price.

For the European Union to venture out of the slow lane with a pledge to adopt by 2009 binding targets for cutting greenhouse gas emissions is therefore a bigger achievement than it sounds.

The agreement by 27 nations at last week's EU summit could go on to shape a wider international deal. More is the pity, then, that special pleading to protect some of the bloc's biggest industrial polluters risks undermining that progress.

Tough targets for reducing carbon dioxide emissions should be an important part of a successor treaty to the Kyoto protocol, which is due to expire in 2012. As long as the targets are legally binding, and not merely voluntary, they could provide a robust framework for making the deep cuts in emissions that will be needed to avert global warming.

Yet targets will achieve little on their own. Make them too ambitious - the EU wants a 20 per cent cut from 1990 levels by 2020 - and they are unlikely to be met. Impose too many and they become valueless. They can only be effective if there are strong economic incentives in place to change consumer and business behaviour. That means putting a price on carbon dioxide.

On this trickier issue, instead of forging common ground on how to reform the EU's emissions trading scheme so it contributes to a stable carbon price, the summit exposed divisions between member states.

Germany led a group of nations who wanted to set out next year measures that would protect energy-intensive industries from rivals in countries such as China that have less ambitious carbon emissions programmes. They fear production could move elsewhere if the EU takes the lead on penalising emissions. A compromise agreed on action if there was no accord at a world conference in December 2009.

The erosion of margins and risk to jobs should other countries fail to impose tough standards are valid concerns. But this was the wrong moment to try to water down commitments. America's policy on global warming - it has opposed binding emissions cuts - may change after a new US president is elected in November. The EU would have no credibility if it drew up get-out clauses now, while America would have less cause to shift its position.

Calls, too, for import tariffs to be imposed on countries with lower environmental standards smack of protectionism and encourage a tit-for-tat response. If Europe's leaders are serious about setting an example, they will have to be bolder.
