 NATIONAL NEWS, Friday, December 3, 2010 350 mots, p. 4

Shell sponsors museum's climate change exhibition
By Clive Cookson, Science Editor

Shell, the oil group, is sponsoring an extension to the Science Museum dedicated to exploring "the science, not the controversy" behind climate change.

The new £4.5m gallery will be opened today by the Prince of Wales.

Corporate sponsors have met most of the costs, led by Shell and Siemens, the German electronics and engineering group, with £1m donations each.

The gallery, which is called Atmosphere, "aims to make sense of one of the biggest issues today", said Chris Rapley, the museum's director. "Our job is to present the science, not the controversy. We have not gone beyond the science into areas where we have no particular authority - the economics and politics."

Even so, by representing mainstream climate science, the museum gives visitors the clear impression that man-made warming is a problem that needs to be tackled urgently through coherent global action.

The gallery is divided into five zones covering climate history, the greenhouse effect and energy balance in the atmosphere, rising carbon dioxide levels, evidence for climate change, and ways technology can tackle climate change by cutting carbon emissions.

James Smith, chairman of Shell UK, said his company was enthusiastic about the gallery. "For me, the fundamental science of climate change is very clear: there are certain molecules that absorb energy and will heat up the atmosphere if you add them to it," Mr Smith said.

"You can postulate circumstances in which the consequences are not too bad and others in which they are very bad. We know that climate change will have to be tackled sooner or later - and the sensible thing in business is to tackle problems early."

Mr Smith insisted that Shell was taking climate change seriously. Its own carbon emissions were down 30 per cent since 1990, he said, and would continue to fall as the company made the transition from oil to natural gas production. At the same time, it was investing heavily in new low-carbon technologies.

The Atmosphere gallery contains many exhibits illustrating past climate, including tree rings, fossils, ocean sediment and - most fascinating - a freezer containing an Antarctic ice core.

The cylinder was drilled by the British Antarctic Survey so that scientists could extract the tiny air bubbles trapped in the ice as it formed. Their composition shows atmospheric conditions at the time, including the amount of carbon dioxide. The ice core on display at the museum dates back to 1410. Others - much too long to fit in the gallery - go back as far as 800,000 years. 