 FT REPORT - WORKING IN TAX, Thursday, January 21, 2010 450 mots, p. 5

Climate brings in opportunity

EnvironmentRobert Bruce looks at the potential benefits from government intervention

Green taxes are the up-and-coming thing in tax circles. They are in tune with the times. They deal with the challenge of climate change. They provide tax advisers with a rich new vein of both intellectual challenge and income stream. And they provide a new career path.

"There are a few risks that it might not take off, but if you want to get in on the ground floor then this is a good bet," says John Whiting, policy director at the Chartered Institute of Taxation (CIOT).

It may be a long-term bet, but it could be a good one. The combination of climate change and filling a deficit left by the economic crisis could provide the trigger. "Any government is going to have to raise a lot of money and raise it quickly," says Francesca Lagerberg, head of tax at Grant Thornton, an accountancy. "Green tax is something which people have sympathy with. It seems an easy task for politicians."

The ground rules are already being laid out. Last summer the CIOT published its Green Tax Report, which aimed to provide a foundation for the new discipline of green taxation.

It was the brainchild of the CIOT's then president, Nick Goulding, an adviser with KPMG, a consultancy. His view is that pressure is coming from both environmentalists and governments.

"It is clear that non-governmental activity in this area will simply not go away as environmentalists and other pressure groups step up their efforts to get governments to do far more to control emissions and protect the planet," he says.

"One can say with some certainty that tax and other fiscal measures are expected to play an important role in tackling this worldwide problem."

However, the thinking behind green tax is in its infancy. The idea of engineering social change through tax is a complex one.

"No government has produced a green tax to deal with climate change," says Mr Lagerberg. "So far they have just been an easy way of raising money." And trying to change behaviour can raise the public's hackles. "When you look at it in more depth they do hit day-to-day living, like fuel taxes, and that is when you lose the public," says Mr Lagerberg.

John Whiting agrees: "Everyone can see lots of ways of doing it. But making them work will be complex." Although here he sees another career path opening up. "Getting in there and designing ways of making it all work would be good," he says.

"It will be an opportunity for tax people to be at the heart of businesses, working with the operational people to see how they can all adapt," says Mark Schofield who leads PwC's sustainability and climate change tax network. "It will be a fascinating time with more people needed to look at the possible impacts on businesses."

The arrival of a serious structure of green taxation will create all manner of challenges. Businesses will have to deal with changing costs, there will be greater complexity sprung by compliance and legal questions as well as measurement, reporting and assurance issues.

It is a new world to conquer. "Green taxes could be the third age of tax," says Mr Whiting. "Tax started by taxing things - like land for example. Then it moved on to more abstract concepts like profits. Green taxes could be the next stage." Time to get in on the ground floor.
