 WORLD NEWS, Thursday, March 11, 2010 242 mots, p. 9

Climate panel work faces review
By Harvey Morris at the United Nations

The United Nations yesterday appointed international experts to review the work of its climate change panel after errors in the body's last report were seized on by sceptics to challenge its scientific evidence for global warming.

Ban Ki-moon, UN secretary-general, said "a very small number of errors" in a report by the UN's Nobel-prize-winning Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, did not undermine the fundamental scientific consensus. Evidence collected since the 2007 report suggested climate change was accelerating, he said.

Rajendra Pachauri, the IPCC chief who has come under fire after acknowledging an error in his panel's fourth report, said he welcomed the independent review. "It is critically important the science in our report is accepted across the world. . . so that this challenge can be met effectively," he said.

An error in the landmark 2007 report that claimed Himalayan glaciers could almost disappear by 2035 was traced by the New Scientist to an interview it conducted with an Indian glaciologist in 1999. The claim was not repeated in any peer-review study, and was rebuffed by other glaciologists, who maintain the glaciers could take centuries to vanish.

Other alleged mistakes, such as that crop yields in some African countries could drop by 50 per cent by 2020, remain disputed.

The review will be independent of the UN. It will be undertaken by the Inter- Academy Council, an Amsterdam-based scientific advisory body. Robbert Dijkgraff, its co-chairman, said the review of the procedures of the IPCC, which is starting work on a fifth report, would be completed by August.

"The panel will look at how the evidence was used and how errors can be avoided in future," he told reporters.

In Beijing yesterday, Xie Zhenhua, China's chief climate change negotiator, urged the US to make stronger commitments on climate change and to help developing countries.
