Telegraph (London, UK) Thursday, May 27, 2010A SUMMER OF' 76 EVERY DECADE (MET OFFICE PREDICTS)Louise Gray Environment correspondentTHEIR promises of a barbecue summer turned into last year's washout July and August.Then the forecasters at the Met Office told the public to prepare for a mild winter. It was one of the coldest on record.Undeterred by the critical reaction, the organisation is looking ahead again, to predict long, hot, dry summers every decade.Extreme droughts could become 10 times as frequent as now because of climate change, meteorologists warned in a report yesterday.The weather will be similar to 1976, the hottest summer since British records began, when temperatures reached 95F (36C), rivers and lakes dried out and the south of the country experienced forest fires.Critics suggested that the predictions, looking ahead 90 years to the turn of the century, should be "taken with a pinch of salt".In the aftermath of last year's seasonal forecasts, the Met Office was criticised for handing out GBP12million in bonuses to staff over five years and was even rumoured to be likely to lose its contract with the BBC for the first time.Since then, seasonal predictions have been quietly dropped in favour of updating the forecast every month.But the government agency, which is part of the Ministry of Defence, is still producing "long range" studies. The latest looks at the likelihood of a recurrence of 1976.Currently, such prolonged dry spells occur every 50 to 100 years.But even in what the authorities regard as the best case scenario for climate change in Britain - in which average temperatures rise by about 3.6F (2C) - droughts would become more frequent.In the Met Office's worst case scenario, temperatures could reach 7.2F (4C) above average, summer rain would be less frequent and droughts could occur every 10 years.They could be even worse than 1976, when some areas had no rain for months, elderly people were taken to hospital with heat exhaustion and domestic water supplies had to be restricted.Eleanor Burke, climate extremes scientist with the Met Office, said Britain had to prepare. This could include designing buildings to cope with heat, producing emergency plans in hospitals and schools, growing heat resistant crops like vines and, of course, hosepipe bans."Severe droughts have a big impact - causing water shortages, health risks, fire hazards, crop failure and subsidence. Understanding how the frequency of these events will change is therefore very important to planning for the future," she said.Jonathan Powell, of Positive Weather Solutions, said the weather would continue to oscillate as it was now controlled more by pressure systems than global warming. "Not long ago the Met Office were saying summers would be wet and cloudy over the next 80 years, so it seems like a complete reversal," he said. "I would take anything they say with a pinch of salt."Despite the "ice cream weather" last weekend, it is predicted to be cooler and wet over the next few days.On the bright side, if this is a hot summer there should be plenty of places to swim. The Environment Agency has secured GBP4billion of investment by water companies to improve bathing water quality in 160 sites in England.