Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, October 19, 2010PUBLIC TO PAY FOR NEW NUCLEAR ERALouise Gray Environment CorrespondentTAXPAYERS face paying billions of pounds to help clean up nuclear power plants to encourage private firms to build the next generation of power stations.Chris Huhne, the Energy and Climate Change Secretary, said nuclear power would be a key part of the energy mix over the next 40 years.He announced eight sites around the country where nuclear power stations could be built.However, there are concerns about the cost of cleaning up radioactive waste. Britain is already paying out up to GBP100billion to decommission the nuclear power stations currently in use.Mr Huhne said there would be no public subsidy for new nuclear reactors. But he said the Government would have to take on liability for both accidents and cleaning up the radioactive waste, so that power companies were confident of investing in the new technology.The upper limit on what can be paid out by power companies in case of an accident could be raised to up to GBP1billion.The Government will take ultimate responsibility for clearing up the waste in case the power companies go bust, although Mr Huhne insisted that businesses would be asked to put aside enough funds to pay for this."We are not ruling out action by the Government to take on financial risks or liabilities for which it is appropriately compensated or for which there are corresponding benefits," he said.Prof Gordon MacKerron, of the Sussex Energy Group, a research body, said power companies would be asked to pay into a decommissioning fund. "There is a risk that taxpayers get landed with the bill if companies go bankrupt," he said.Mike Childs, of Friends of the Earth, said the public could end up paying billions to clean up power stations because there was unlikely to be enough in the decommissioning fund. "Nuclear power is not the solution to tackling climate change -- it would leave us saddled with toxic waste for centuries to come," he said.