The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, August 24, 2010CLIMATE ACTIVISTS CLASH WITH POLICE IN EDINBURGHAuslan Cramb Scottish CorrespondentCLIMATE change activists clashed with police last night after a day of protests across Edinburgh and accusations that protesters had endangered the public with a "reckless" stunt.Police made 12 arrests after warning that the "rules of engagement" had changed following a series of incidents outside the headquarters of the Royal Bank of Scotland.Windows were smashed on Sunday and riot police were called in to protect the GBP335million complex yesterday as activists used catapults to fire objects at them.The short-lived clashes, in which balloons filled with brown liquid were launched, followed an announcement by Lothian and Borders Police that they had seized weapons at the climate change camp. Around 500 protesters occupied fields overlooking the RBS building in Gogarburn over the weekend before launching their day of "mass action" in the Scottish capital.Spokesmen for the climate camp claimed their protests would be peaceful but officers said they had seen activists wielding hammers and throwing missiles. Many of the 3,300 staff at the Gogarburn site were encouraged to work from home.Supt Lesley Clark said police plans to facilitate peaceful protest had failed, adding: "There seems to be an element determined to wreak havoc. We will be working to protect the public and maintain order. "We have drafted in officers from most Scottish forces and there is a substantial police presence on site. "What we were hoping to achieve was to continue to work with the protesters and allow them to protest."However, the rules of engagement have now changed and we need to think about a more robust policing response which we always did envisage maybe being the case." The latest direct action involved rooftop protests, buildings being daubed with graffiti, roads being blocked, people chaining themselves to doors and others supergluing themselves together.Police said they were particularly concerned by one incident yesterday in which an oil-like substance was spread on the A720 ring road and the westbound A8 outside the city. A spokesman for Lothian and Borders Police said it was a "reckless and dangerous" act that could have placed many members of the public at risk.He added: "It is a worrying trend and disturbing escalation in the activities of the protesters." Seven activists were said to have super- glued themselves to the executive car park of RBS offices at the Gyle shopping centre, another seven targeted the Forth Energy building and activists created an "oil slick" with molasses outside the Cairn Energy offices. Bank branches in Nicolson Street, North Bridge and Hunter Square were also targeted.Cairn Energy develops oil and gas reserves around the world while Forth Energy was formed by Scottish and Southern Energy and Forth Ports plc to develop renewable energy projects.Scottish and Southern is the UK's largest renewable energy generator and Forth Ports plc owns and operates seven commercial ports. Activists said they were targeting the company because of its plans to build four "environmentally destructive" biomass -- wood-burning -- power stations in Scotland.A spokesman from the climate camp added: "Biomass is exacerbating climate change, destroying precious forests and pulling money away from real, sustainable solutions, like energy efficiency measures, wind, solar and tidal power." The Edinburgh Book Festival, sponsored by RBS, also found itself disrupted when a talk by the Nobel prize-winning economist Joseph Stiglitz was interrupted.Stiglitz has been a critic of modern banking and globalisation, leaving organisers wondering why he was targeted. The climatecamp was set up last Thursday to object to the bank's investment in oil industry developments around the world.Activists described RBS, which is 84 per cent owned by the taxpayer, as a "climate criminal" and said it was financing developments which could be dangerous for the environment.Annette, a protester from France, said: "We're not trying to antagonise anyone or stop them doing their business. "We're just trying to raise awareness and maybe get things to change."RBS said it had been one of the most active banks in the world in providing funding for renewable energy projects in recent years.Protesters are expected to start leaving the camp today.