		The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Thursday, July 22, 2010PROFESSOR STEPHEN SCHNEIDERPROFESSOR STEPHEN SCHNEIDER, who died on Monday aged 65, made his name in the 1970s by predicting a "new ice age", but went on to become one of the best-known proponents of the idea of global warming caused by human activities.The founder and editor of the journal Climate Science, Schneider advised every American president from Nixon to Obama and was a leading member of the UN panel on climate change that shared the Nobel Peace Prize with Al Gore in 2007. He wrote books and more than 400 articles and was in the forefront in demanding international action to prevent catastrophic global warming.Schneider was a pioneer in the development of computer models that combine processes like ocean dynamics and cloud changes to study and predict climate change. He also carried out research into the impact of climate change on the distribution of plant and animal species and studied the damage greenhouse gases cause to the ozone layer.In recent years he had become involved in working with economists on the likely costs of stabilising the world's climate, developing policy options for mitigating and adapting to climate change and researching whether it is possible to identify a "tipping point" that could announce more rapid climate change.Schneider had the rare gift of being able to explain the complexities of climate science to the public in simple terms and, as befits the author of Science as a Contact Sport (2007), was combative in challenging the climate sceptics. While he willingly conceded that climate science is fraught with uncertainty (it was not "either/or", he said, but "a bell curve of possibilities"), he was withering about those who exploit that uncertainty to undermine public faith in a scientific consensus based on the "accumulated preponderance of evidence".His vigour in public debate attracted vitriol. An FBI investigation found his name on a neo-Nazi "death list", and a constant stream of abusive emails reached a peak earlier this year after he published a paper showing that 97-98 per cent of climate scientists agree that mankind's carbon emissions are causing global temperatures to increase.But his anger over the purposeful distortion of the environmental debate was equally directed at what he called the "almost religious fervour of the emotive enviros", which he regarded as nearly as damaging as the manipulations of the deniers. Interest groups of both extremes, he argued, "select information out of context to protect their interests while clear exposition and balanced assessment sinks even lower on the priority list of advocatedriven debates".Ironically, perhaps, Schneider himself was credited with providing the sceptics with one of the best quotations in their armoury during a 1988 interview with Discover magazine in which he explained how scientists were having to think of vivid ways of getting their message across. As widely reproduced, the quotation read: "Scientists should consider stretching the truth to get some broad-base support, to capture the public's imagination. That, of course, entails getting loads of media coverage. So we have to offer up scary scenarios, make simplified, dramatic statements, and make little mention about any doubts we might have."In fact, the phrase "stretching the truth" was not in the original interview, but was added later by critics who invariably omitted Schneider's vital qualification: "This 'double ethical bind' we frequently find ourselves in cannot be solved by any formula. Each of us has to decide what the right balance is between being effective and being honest. I hope that means being both."In Science as a Contact Sport, Schneider ventured the opinion that the "battle" over climate change looked "more winnable these days". Yet after the failure of the Copenhagen summit, he struck a more pessimistic note, observing that the uncertainty of the science was being exploited to blunt the political will to act. "Can democracy survive complexity?" he wondered.Stephen Henry Schneider was born in New York City on February 11 1945 and grew up on Long Island. After taking a degree in Mechanical Engineering at Columbia University, he went on to take a doctorate in Mechanical Engineering and Plasma Physics in 1971.The same year Schneider co-wrote an article in the journal Science about atmospheric aerosols -- floating particles of soil dust, volcanic ash and human-made pollutants. His research suggested that industrial aerosols could block sunlight and reduce global temperatures enough to overcome the effects of greenhouse gases, a suggestion which brought national headlines warning of an imminent ice age.But he soon realised that he had overestimated the amount of aerosols in the air. When he recalculated with more accurate data in 1974, he concluded that the warming effect of CO2 would be greater than the cooling caused by aerosols. His apparent change of heart gave his critics much ammunition over the years, and the experience led Schneider to emphasise the vital importance of data checking and of accumulated evidence, which was not available in the early 1970s when climate science was a new field.After a period of postdoctoral study at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies at Nasa, Schneider moved to the National Center for Atmospheric Research at Boulder, Colorado, where, among other things, he carried out research on the likely climatic impact of nuclear war, concluding that the widely predicted "nuclear winter" was more likely to be a "nuclear autumn".In 1992 he moved to Stanford University, where he held chairs in Interdisciplinary Environmental Studies and Biological Sciences, as well as an honorary chair in Civil and Environmental Engineering. He served as a member of the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change from its inception in 1988 until his death.In 2001 Schneider was diagnosed with mantle cell lymphoma, a rare and highly lethal cancer. Determined to fight the disease, he used probability models he had developed for climate research to push his doctors to try treatments they either dismissed or had not considered. Four years later, when the disease was in remission, he wrote about his experiences in a book entitled The Patient From Hell.Stephen Schneider died of a heart attack while flying to London from a science meeting in Stockholm. He is survived by his wife, Terry Root, a fellow scientist at Stanford, and by a son and daughter from a previous marriage