Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, June 30, 2010DOUBLE WIND FARM BUILDING AND SELL 1M ELECTRIC CARSLouise Gray Environment CorrespondentBRITAIN must build twice as many wind farms every year, put more than a million electric cars on the road and insulate every home to meet legally-binding climate change targets, government advisers have warned.Under laws brought in by Labour, the country is committed to cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 34 per cent from 1990 levels by 2020.The Committee on Climate Change (CCC), set up to advise ministers on progress, says today that it is on course to fail.Lord Turner, the committee chairman, said the recession had created the "illusion" that Britain was tackling climate change, but the substantial declines in emissions were almost entirely due to the downturn in the economy.Greenhouse gases fell by 8.6 per cent last year, but only a fraction of that was as a result of measures such as renewable energy or making homes more energy-efficient.To carry on cutting carbon as the economy recovers, the CCC is recommending radical policies, including a ban on polluting power stations, a crackdown on air travel and a tax on farmers' fertiliser.Its chief executive, David Kennedy, said: "We've had a light-touch approach in the UK, we've talked a good game but what we've seen is emissions haven't fallen."In its report, the committee says Britain needs to increase the proportion of energy generated from renewable sources from 5 to 15 per cent by 2020.In wind power alone, twice as many turbines need to be built every year.There should be a tax on carbon to make generating power from fossil fuels more expensive and a ban on power stations that emit too much pollution, so that by 2020 only renewables, nuclear and "clean" coal or gas power stations are allowed to operate. Between 400,000 and 1.8million homes a year will have to improve their insulation.The committee says home owners are not bothering because current subsidies are "too much hassle".The number of electric cars on the road needs to increase from the current 2,000 to 1.7million by 2020, the committee says, and the Government must provide a GBP260million subsidy to ensure electric cars are made and bought in Britain and to set up a national battery recharging network.Those steps could even enable Britain to meet more ambitious 42 per cent reductions in greenhouse gases, which the committee says the Government should consider.Chris Huhne, the Energy and Climate Change Secretary, agreed that more needed to be done."There has to be an enduring shift to low carbon, driving growth in new technologies, and it must be locked into the fabric of our economy in good times and bad," he said."We will overhaul the energy efficiency of homes through our Green Deal, we are working to create a Green Investment Bank to help low carbon investment, and we have committed central government itself to cut emissions by 10 per cent within a year."34pc The cut in greenhouse gases which Britain is legally obliged to achieve in the next ten years