Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, July 28, 2010ENERGY REVOLUTION COULD PUT BILLS UP BY A THIRDLouise Gray and Harry WallopHOUSEHOLDERS face a GBP300-a-year rise in their gas and electricity bills and significant cuts in how much energy they use if Britain is to "keep the lights on" and meet its climate change targets, the Government said yesterday.In the Coalition's first annual energy statement to the Commons, Chris Huhne, the Energy Secretary, outlined plans to transform Britain's power system and cut carbon emissions by 80 per cent within the next 40 years. He announced 32 separate measures, from the use of smart meters in all homes to a major expansion of renewable energy sources, including a new generation of nuclear power stations and up to 44,000 wind turbines.However, Mr Huhne's department admitted that such policies could increase the price of electricity by up to a third and gas by up to a fifth. This would make the average family's annual energy bill of GBP1,100, GBP300 more expensive.To offset this, the Energy Secretary said people would have to make "ambitious" cuts in their own consumption and improve the energy efficiency of their homes, including installing energy generators such as solar panels.The Government believes that householders will ultimately be able to offset all but GBP13 of the GBP300-a-year rise in energy costs with efficiency savings. However, it has assumed that electronics manufacturers will continue to make products more effi-cient and so save the average family more than GBP120 a year.Ann Robinson, of uswitch.com, the price comparison website, said: "Consumers are going to have to significantly reduce the amount of energy they are using just to be able to afford it."Consumer Focus, the watchdog, was concerned at the impact on the poorest consumers."Only the middle class and better-off can afford to install solar panels, but the subsidies to fund these measures are paid by all bill payers," said Audrey Gallacher, its head of energy policy.In the Commons, Mr Huhne promised "a clear strategy for creating the 21st-century energy system that this country urgently needs for an affordable, secure, low-carbon future".He said the events surrounding BP in the Gulf of Mexico showed the importance of moving away from an economy dependent on fossil fuels. With rising dependence on imported fuel leaving Britain at risk of future oil shocks, Mr Huhne said the Coalition wanted to move "further and faster" towards greater energy independence.He admitted that the cheapest way "to keep the lights on" as energy prices rose was for people to "cut energy use".A "street by street" refurbishment of Britain's housing would be carried out over the next few years through a combination of private and public investment. Energy companies would be forced to ensure that homes in deprived areas were better insulated.By 2018 every home would have a smart meter that enabled home owners to monitor and manage electricity use. Mr Huhne said Britain would need to increase the proportion of power coming from renewables from the current 5 per cent to at least 15 per cent. This would mean investing in onshore and offshore wind farms, solar panels and hydroelectric plants, as well as generating energy from wood and waste. Coal-fired power stations would remain part of the grid as long as emissions were stored underground using "carbon capture". As a Liberal Democrat, Mr Huhne is opposed to nuclear power on principle. But he admitted that the technology would help Britain meet energy demand and predicted that the first of up to 10 new power stations would come on stream in 2018. "The lights are not going to go out on my watch," he said. John Sauven, of Greenpeace, said the plan was "worthless" without details on funding. "If we keep kicking our heels instead of building a clean energy economy, we'll miss our climate change targets and lose the economic advantage that would result from being a world leader in green technology," he said.