Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, May 1, 2010COULD A CLIMATE DEAL FALL VICTIM TO THIS OIL SLICK?Geoffrey LeanCould the greatest casualty of the giant oil slick surging through the Gulf of Mexico turn out to be not Louisiana's magnificent wildlife, or the biggest US fishery outside Alaska, but the last remaining chance of an international agreement to combat  ? It seems counterintuitive.Surely an economic and ecological disaster, caused by exploiting the fossil fuels that emit all that carbon dioxide, should make the world keener to tackle global warming by moving to cleaner sources of energy? But that would be in a rational universe - one where agreement did not depend on two increasingly dysfunctional institutions: the UN climate treaty negotiations and the US Congress.In the real world, there is no possibility of a new treaty unless Congress first passes legislation to reduce emissions from the United States. And, until the oil started gushing from the well beneath BP's Deepwater Horizon rig, the best chance of getting this through was for Capitol Hill, and the whole of the United States, to stop worrying about slicks and learn to love offshore oil drilling.The story starts 41 years ago, with a blowout at an oil platform some six miles offshore from Santa Barbara, California. Over 11 days, 200,000 gallons of crude oil bubbled to the surface, killing birds and dolphins, and polluting some 35 miles of coastline. It was by no means the worst oil spill, but it was possibly the most important one, because it helped kickstart the US environmental movement, which then rapidly spread worldwide.Richard Nixon, just days into his first presidential term, said that the spill had touched his conscience (which must have taken some doing), though the president of Union Oil, which operated the platform, objected: "I am amazed at the publicity for the loss of a few birds."The result was that oil drilling became unacceptable off the West Coast. Twenty years later the prohibition extended nationwide, after the much more serious spill from the Exxon Valdez in Alaska. The taboo started to dissolve as oil prices rose, and vanished when they peaked before the financial collapse. "Drill, baby, drill" became Sarah Palin's war cry, while Republican commentators opined that offshore oil was "extraordinarily safe and environmentally friendly" because none had been spilled during Hurricane Katrina.Barack Obama also took up the new article of faith, promising in his election campaign to restart the drilling. And just a month ago he opened up vast areas off the East Coast and in the Gulf of Mexico to oil companies (the Santa Barbara effect still lingers in the West).This was a trade-off to try to get Republican and conservative Democrat senators to back a new climate bill.So far it hasn't worked: indeed the bill is already in trouble because one of its sponsors, the Republican Lindsay Graham, withdrew after the Senate leadership scheduled immigration legislation ahead of it. But now it faces a new danger: that previously supportive Democrats from coastal states rebel. One, Robert Menendez from New Jersey, says: "I have let the administration know that if they do not protect New Jersey from the effects of coastal drilling in the climate-change bill, then my vote is in question."By chance - even as the black tide approached Louisiana this week - the Obama administration approved another controversial energy development off a sensitive shore - a giant windfarm in Nantucket Sound, off Massachusetts. Environmentalists have fought the plans, the first US offshore wind project, for a decade, but the disaster in the Gulf may boost its chances. It's an ill wind, as they say, but the climate treaty may well be blown away, none the less.