Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, November 6, 2010A GIANT VICTORY FOR THE WORLDGeoffrey LeanYou can wait for decades, San Franciscans are feeling this week, for a really big reason to celebrate - and now two have come along within days. The first reason to party, as the city I've been staying in duly did, came when the baseball team, the San Francisco Giants, won the World Series for the first time since 1954, beating the Texas Rangers. But the second victory, which attracted little attention even in the United States, was far more important. Given the first chance, anywhere in the world, to vote for or against radical action against climate change, the voters overwhelmingly backed it.The victory, on a state ballot initiative, was all the more significant - and surprising - since it came on a night when the country turned sharply Right, electing scores of Republican Congressmen who, as Barack Obama admitted, will kill off his last hopes of securing national legislation to combat global warming. Yet hundreds of thousands of Republican voters formed part of the 60-40 majority that defeated Proposition 23, which would have forced the state to shelve its farreaching climate law indefinitely.The site of the second celebration was a bar at the baseball stadium - which was particularly apt, because the proposition had been promoted by two big Texan oil companies. "It was here yesterday that California beat Texas, and less than 24 hours later we have beaten Texas again," said the outgoing governor, Arnold Schwarzenegger (much smaller than you'd expect, but so well preserved - apparently artificially - that he seems to belong in Madame Tussauds). He added, inevitably: "To anyone who tries to take out our environmental laws, I say 'Hasta la vista, baby!'" Parochial populism apart, this was a momentous event. A ballot of some seven million people, representing one of the world's top ten economies, decisively endorsed low-carbon growth - even at a time of recession and sky-high unemployment. That will have a worldwide effect, encouraging governments (like ours) who believe it provides the best prospect of prosperity.If the vote had gone the other way, it would have delivered a devastating blow to the world's already fragile efforts to fend off dangerous climate change. And that, for a long time, is what looked like happening. Proposition 23 was couched in eminently reasonable terms. It did not seek to deny the existence of global warming, or call for all measures against it to be abandoned. It merely proposed suspending enforcement of the state's main climate law - aimed at returning its greenhouse gas emissions to 1990 levels by 2020 - until the unemployment rate dropped to 5.5 per cent for a full year. In fact, that is extremely unlikely - it has only been achieved twice in the last 34 years, and the rate currently stands at a massive 12.6 per cent - but it seemed reasonable enough.The proposition rapidly gathered two-to-one support. Even a month ago, voters were evenly split; they only reversed their original position after hearing both sides of the argument. Greens are busy spinning it as a "David v Goliath" coup, but it was more like King Kong v a video game boss: it developed into battle between old industry and the new, and fossil fuels against clean energy, as the entrepreneurs around Silicon Valley joined, and largely financed, the environmentalist side.Equally important, the political battle was fought on economic, not ecological, grounds. The oil companies called the climate law a "job killer", but the technocrats could show that the law had already attracted nearly $9 billion in venture capital for clean technology, and that green jobs have been increasing 10 times faster than the state average.Of course, California did generally buck the Rightward trend on Tuesday night. But 28 per cent of those who voted for Meg Whitman, the defeated Republican candidate for governor, still sided with the environmentalists. It's true, too, that the new industries far outspent the old: but Miss Whitman's spending dwarfed that of her own rival, and it didn't get her very far.Flushed with the success of what he called "an extraordinary coalition", Schwarzenegger promised to go to Washington to try to "jump-start" national legislation. That seems a very tall order, but his fellow Republican George Schultz - Ronald Reagan's treasury secretary, who chaired the campaign against Proposition 23 - stresses that, for the first time, an electorate has spoken. "Pay attention, politicians," he warned at Tuesday's celebrations. "Pay attention."