The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Thursday, October 7, 2010STRONGER SUN MAKES EARTH COOL, NOT HOT, SAY EXPERTSRichard Alleyne Science CorrespondentAN INCREASE in the Sun's activity cools the Earth rather than heating it, suggests research which will challenge assumptions about its role in climate change. Until now, it had been assumed that less solar activity equated to a decrease in warming of the Earth. The new research, which focuses on a three-year snapshot between 2004 and 2007, suggests the opposite may be true. Sceptics are likely to say the results further undermine the reliability of the science behind climate change. The new data showed that, as solar activity fell at the end of one of the Sun's 11-year cycles, the light and heat reaching the Earth actually rose.While it may support climate change sceptics' arguments in the short term, longterm analysis suggests it actually provides further evidence that the heating of the planet is more than a natural, cyclical phenomenon. Over the past century, overall solar activity has been increasing and should therefore cool the Earth, yet global temperatures have increased. Professor Joanna Haigh of Imperial College London,led the study published in Nature and denied that it would increase scepticism about climate change research. "It may suggest that we don't know that much about the Sun," she said. "It casts no aspersions at all upon the climate models. These results are challenging what we thought we knew about the Sun's effect on our climate."We cannot jump to any conclusions based on what we have found during this comparatively short period." Professor Sir Brian Hoskins, the director of the Grantham Institute for Climate Change, said: "We know that the Earth's climate is affected both by human activity and by natural forces and today's study improves our understanding of how the Sun influences our climate. "Studies like this are vital for helping us to create a clear picture of how our climate is changing and through this, to work out how we can best protect our planet."Spell of autumn sun Much of Britain is expected to be graced with an unusual spell of sunshine later this week, said forecasters. Unseasonably warm temperatures tomorrow are likely to peakat72F(22C)in the South and 64F (18C) in the North. Warm air from the continent is expected to send temperatures to 70F on Saturday and 64F on Sunday.