Telegraph (London, UK) Friday, May 7, 2010SUMMER IS STARTING 18 DAYS EARLIERLouise Gray Environment CorrespondentIT MIGHT not feel like it, but summer in Britain arrives 18 days earlier than half a century ago, according to a study. Researchers at the University of Sheffield looked at average temperatures and flowering plants to work out when the season changed.They found summer temperatures, averaging at least 57F (14C) for three days in a row, now occur in early May rather than mid June. Summer flowers such as geraniums and roses are coming out three days earlier than in the past, the study found.The team attributed the changes to global warming and warned that the early onset of summer could cause prolonged droughts and problems for wildlife. Previous studies have shown that spring is coming earlier and autumn later but this is the first paper to look at summer.Prof Grant Bigg, the lead author of the study which was published in the journal Climatic Change, looked at temperatures from 1954 to 2007. Although he found the day on which summer arrives fluctuates each year, on average it is starting earlier. By the 1990s, summer temperatures had advanced by 11 days, compared with the period 1954-1963 when the season arrived on May 25. By the beginning of this decade, the season was arriving 18 days earlier on average.This means that summer should be beginning in Britain today - May 7. Prof Bigg explained that it would be a little later this year as a result of the cold winter. He also said early summers did not necessarily mean temperatures would be hot throughout the season, although there are expected to be more heatwaves in the future. "This particular year is a little bit later, but on average this period in May has become much warmer than it has been for the last few decades," he said.Traditionally the British summer begins on June 21 with the summer solstice. The Met Office counts June through to August as summer. Forecasters predict the weather will remain cloudy and fairly cool for the next few days, with showers across the country.Climate Politicians use 'McCarthy tactics'LEADING scientists have demanded an end to the persecution of climate change experts. In a letter in the journal Science, members of the US National Academy of Sciences said: "We call for an end to McCarthy-like threats against colleagues, the harassment of scientists by politicians seeking to avoid taking action, and the outright lies being spread about them." A 10-year plan is vital to stop wildlife disappearing, said an international conservation group.