

Friday, December 11, 2015 • 11:11Z

Financial Times (web site) • 914 words

COP21: Paris climate talks
extended until Saturday

Pilita Clark and Michael Stothard in Paris


Talks on a new international climate deal are to continue into Saturday, a day after they were due to end, after negotiators wrangled into the early hours of Friday morning over the extent to which wealthy countries should continue to lead the fight against global warming.

Laurent Fabius, France's foreign minister, told French news channel BFMTV that he would present a new text of the agreement on Saturday morning, aiming to seal an accord among almost 200 nations at around midday.

The move was widely expected, since UN climate talks rarely finish on time and this meeting is more fraught than most. Delegates are aiming to reach a new global deal six years after the last attempt collapsed in heated disputes in Copenhagen.

The French hosts of the Paris talks had still hoped to buck the trend this year and finish on schedule, releasing a 27-page draft of the agreement at 9pm on Thursday in an effort to capture the dozens of compromises needed to finalise the accord.

"We're extremely close to the finishing line," Mr Fabius told weary delegates before ordering them back to negotiations.

But his hopes were scuppered by the same string of disagreements between rich and poor countries that have brought deadlock to climate negotiations for more than 20 years.

The last global climate treaty, the 1997 Kyoto protocol, obliged wealthy countries to cut their carbon emissions, but did not so for countries deemed at then time to be developing, including China - now the world's biggest greenhouse gas polluter.

The new accord is aimed at getting all countries to limit their emissions. Developed nations, led by the US and the EU, also want large developing countries to start pitching in to deliver funding to help the very poorest nations cope with global warming.

But this has run into tough resistance from China, India and a batch of developing countries led by Malaysia, which say it amounts to a dilution of wealthy countries' historical responsibility for climate change.

The latest version of the draft agreement says governments should stick to a previously agreed goal to keep warming below 2C from pre-industrial times, and "pursue efforts" to stop temperatures rising more than 1.5C. But the emissions cuts needed to meet these temperature goals have been watered down from earlier drafts.

Previous versions had echoed a call by G7 leaders in June for the "decarbonisation" of the global economy over the course of this century and a specific cut in greenhouse gas emissions of at least 40 per cent by 2050.

This was opposed by several countries, including Saudi Arabia, a leading exporter of fossil fuels that produce carbon dioxide when burnt to produce energy.

In a statement explaining their position on Thursday, Saudi delegates said the agreement should "consider all greenhouse gas emissions and not just CO2". Policies to reduce emissions "must cover all sectors instead of focusing exclusively on energy" and should not "discriminate against any of the energy sources", they said. .

The new version of the draft agreement says that countries should try to ensure their emissions peak as soon as possible and then fall rapidly to reach "greenhouse gas emissions neutrality in the second half of the century".

This term was not defined in the text but is generally understood to mean a drastic cut in greenhouse gases, the most abundant of which is carbon dioxide. Climate experts, however, differ over the precise meaning and implications of the term.

"Our analysts back in Washington are crunching through the literature on this," Jennifer Morgan of the US World Resources Institute think-tank told reporters late on Thursday. She said the draft showed "there has been significant progress" made at the talks, and other US and EU environmental groups broadly welcomed the new document.

But Lucy Cadena, climate justice and energy co-ordinator at Friends of the Earth International, said it would produce "a deal that fails humanity".

"After all the warm words of developed countries on a 1.5C limit, the new text contains no obligation to stay under this threshold," she said. "Shockingly, the text could allow for carbon emissions to continue until 2099."

The latest draft sets out plans for countries to revisit their emissions-reduction plans every five years, starting in 2020 - a central demand of dozens of countries including the US, the EU's members and many developing nations.

"Without the five-year cycles, the agreement is meaningless," said Miguel Arias Cañete, the EU's climate commissioner, on Thursday. That was because, he said, the current batch of pledges that more than 180 nations had made for the Paris accord did not add up to enough action to stop temperatures rising above 2C from pre-industrial times - meaning the new agreement had to require regular updating of plans.

However, Gao Feng, special representative for climate change negotiations at China's foreign ministry, said Beijing would not be able to change its climate plans for at least another 15 years. China's plans to limit its carbon emissions covered the 10 years from 2020 to 2030, he said. "I can't say that in the middle, 2025, we would be in a position to change it," he said on the sidelines of the talks.

The draft still contains rival options for several other bitterly contested issues, including making sure countries follow through on their emissions reduction pledges and the type of support that low-lying island countries might get for suffering loss and damage from climate change.
