 Monday, March 31, 2014  Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 1 • 317 words 
 Leading climate scientists in clash over 'silly' statements on report
  By Pilita Clark in London  

Two of the world's leading cli mate researchers have clashed over a report on the impact of global warming and rising sea levels. The chief author of the study by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change challenged the views of an economist drafting a key chapter.  Chris Field, professor of environmental studies at Stanford University in California, made the comments about Professor Richard Tol of the University of Sussex in the UK, a senior author of the report's chapter on climate change's economic impacts.  Prof Tol revealed last week that he had asked for his name to be removed from the study's summary the most widely read section of the IPCC report because he believed it was too "alarmist" and included "silly" statements about the vulnerability of people in war zones to climate change.  However, Prof Field, co-chair of the IPCC working group that produced the weighty report, said Prof Tol was outside the mainstream scientific community. He suggested that the economist was upset because his research had not been better represented in the summary.  "When the IPCC does a report, what you get is the community's position. Richard Tol is a wonderful scientist but he's not at the centre of the thinking. He's kind of  out on the fringe," Prof Field said ahead of the report's release.  "We have other authors who are out on the fringe on the other side and I can assure you that every one of the 309 authors on my report thinks that his or her research is under-cited and is not adequately represented in the findings of the overall report."  Both men took part in discussions over the weekend in Yokohama, which finalised the summary for policy makers highlighting the main findings of the 30-chapter report, the most authoritative study of climate change impacts since the last major IPCC report in 2007.  An early draft of the summary last week, based on Prof Tol's chapter, had said that if global temperatures rose by 2.5C, it could lead to losses of between 0.2 per cent and 2 per cent of world GDP. Some economists believe that warming would actually have a far greater impact and the final summary reflects this uncertainty.    