 WORLD NEWS, Wednesday, November 30, 2016 517 mots, p. 4

EU unveils plan to axe subsidies for fossil fuel energy plants

Climate targets
By Arthur Beesley and Rochelle Toplensky in Brussels

Brussels will announce plans today to eliminate public subsidies for power generation by coal, gas and peat as part of efforts to push the EU towards its Paris climate deal commitments.

The overhaul of energy markets by the European Commission will strengthen binding EU targets requiring member states to increase energy efficiency, step up use of renewable energy and scrap subsidies for fossil fuels in power generation in a five-year transition period.

The 1,000-page plan follows the EU's ratification of the Paris pact in October but it comes amid doubt over Washington's support for the deal reached by almost 200 countries, which is supposed to limit global warming. Having campaigned to pull the US out of the deal, Donald Trump, since winning the presidency, has said he would "keep an open mind" on it.

Miguel Arias Cañete, EU climate and energy commissioner, said it would "not be a very intelligent move" for the incoming US president to repudiate the Paris deal but he argued there had been a "substantial change" in Mr Trump's language.

"Electoral campaigns are something. But when you take your seat, you are responsible for growth and jobs," Mr Arias Cañete said. "I think when it's a global trend, you cannot oppose it . . . Even in a hypothetical scenario in which the [US] federal government withdrew, we would see action in the United States at state level."

He said the US should "think about" what happened when President George W Bush withdrew from the Kyoto pact, making the point that Washington ultimately returned to climate talks as an "extremely active" participant.

Mr Arias Cañete presented the overhaul of energy markets as an opportunity to spur the creation of 900,000 jobs and pump €190bn into Europe's struggling economy by increasing investment in wind power and other forms of renewable energy. Other measures include more support for investment to speed up renovation of Europe's building stock to use less energy.

But the plan includes targets that are politically sensitive for some EU member states. Britain, Poland, Greece, Finland and the Czech Republic have lobbied against tougher pollution rules for coal power stations.

The plan will say that capacity mechanisms - payments to power stations to supply electricity at times of peak demand - should still take harmful emissions into account if fossil fuels are burnt. Member states will have to reduce and eliminate subsidies for plant that exceed a specified emissions threshold.

Mr Arias Cañete will require the EU to become more energy efficient in the decade from 2020, raising from 27 per cent to 30 per cent the bloc's binding target for energy savings compared with a "business as usual" scenario.

EU targets under the Paris pact are binding on the bloc at large but targets for member states are not binding. This has prompted concern among environmental campaigners that voluntary governance mechanisms are too weak.

Member states must produce a draft climate and energy plan by 2018 for regional consultations and a formal evaluation in Brussels, said Mr Arias Cañete.
