
Monday, April 14, 2014

Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 4 • 503 words

Climate change disasters
avoidable, say scientists

Call for move away from fossil fuels

By Clive Cookson in London



Disastrous effects of global warming can still be avoided, the world's leading climate scientists say, but only by making a concerted international effort to cut carbon emissions through heavy investment in renewable and nuclear energy sources.

The UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change's third report of a trilogy on global warming, released on Sunday, focuses on "mitigation" - how to fight rising temperatures by limiting the build-up of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases in the atmosphere.

"This is a message of hope," Ottmar Edenhofer, co-chairman of the group that wrote the report, told the Financial Times. "It can be done, but it means moving away from business as usual to avoid dangerous interference with the climate system."

The main objective is to keep the average worldwide temperature rise below 2C, the internationally agreed target that would avoid catastrophic global change.

The report, based on 1,200 scenarios from scientific papers analysed by 31 modelling teams around the world, concludes that global greenhouse gas emissions must be cut by between 40 and 70 per cent compared with 2010 by mid-century. By 2100 there should be minimal net emissions - or even "negative emissions", which means extracting carbon dioxide from the atmosphere by growing trees on a large scale or scaling up technology still in the early stages of research today.

Big changes in investment, particularly in the energy industries, will be required to achieve the 2C goal. The report estimates that investment in power generation from conventional fossil fuels should fall $30bn a year, while investment in low-carbon plants (nuclear, renewables and carbon capture) rises $147bn a year. Total global annual investment in the energy system is about $1,200bn today.

In addition, the IPCC says investment to improve energy efficiency in transport, buildings and industry needs to rise $336bn a year.

The economics of mitigation are a particularly controversial issue in climate policy. The report acknowledges that estimates of the net costs vary widely according to assumptions, model design and technologies available.

It concludes that an ambitious fight against climate change will cut annualised economic growth by somewhere between 0.04 and 0.14 percentage points, with 0.06 percentage points the most likely figure. This would leave global consumption in 2050 just 3.4 per cent lower than under the "business as usual" scenario.

The most immediate need, said Mr Edenhofer, is to end "the renaissance of fossil fuels, particularly coal for power generation in China, India and elsewhere, that we have seen over the past decade or so. To solve that problem, we need to put a price on carbon, which reflects the emerging scarcity of disposal space for carbon dioxide in the atmosphere."

Most environmental groups welcomed the report. But Lord Nicholas Stern of the London School of Economics, author of an influential economic review of climate change, was disappointed that the IPCC did not go further. "This report should have provided a much stronger warning about the dangers of delay and been much clearer about the immense risks from unmanaged climate change," he said.

The final stage in the IPCC fifth assessment round will be the release in October of a "synthesis report" that pulls together this analysis with the two previous reports on the physical science of climate change and its impacts .

At the same time, the political process of trying to reach a binding international agreement will continue, with a UN climate summit scheduled for September in New York. The next milestone will be a meeting in Paris at the end of 2015, which is supposed to agree comprehensive and legally binding measures to fight climate change on a global basis.

"International co-operation is key," said Mr Edenhofer. "Putting in place the international institutions needed for co-operation is a challenge in itself."
