
Wednesday, December 30, 2015

Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 4 • 864 words

Bangladesh plans big jump in coal
power

Climate change: Energy paradox

By Joseph Allchin in Dhaka

 Country says increase is vital to economic development despite environmental risks

Low-lying and densely populated, Bangladesh is among the countries most at risk from climate change and rising sea levels. Yet this vulnerable south Asian nation has ambitious plans to increase its use of coal - a big contributor to global warming - with the help of international donors.

The aim is to increase coal's share of electricity output from 2 per cent to 50 per cent by 2030. Like neighbouring India, which will also be severely affected by climate change, Bangladesh says it has little choice but to expand coal-fired power generation to develop its fast-growing economy, even at the expense of its own environment.

This south Asian paradox is most visible at the Rampal project, a 1,320 megawatt coal plant under construction 15km from the Sunderbans swamplands, a Unesco world heritage site on the Ganges delta that is the world's largest contiguous mangrove forest.

The location for the plant, a joint venture between Bangladesh and India's state-owned National Thermal Power Corp, was chosen near the coast to access shipments of 5m tonnes of imported coal each year. Ships will enter the forest - which is rich in wildlife and home to the Bengal tiger - and transfer their cargoes to smaller vessels at a dolphin sanctuary inside the park.

Potential western financiers, including French bank BNP Paribas and the Norwegian state pension fund, said they would not lend to the Rampal project because it could contribute to what one called "severe environmental damage".

Albrecht Conze, then German ambassador to Bangladesh, also criticised the project, but Fichtner, a German engineering company, won the bid to become its chief consultant.

While working at home to remove coal from its domestic energy mix, Berlin continues to finance the export of coal technology. The Overseas Development Institute, a UK think-tank, notes in a joint study that in 2013-14 German international coal-fired power subsidies amounted to almost $1.5bn worldwide.

Bangladesh, like many developing nations, suffers severe energy shortages. An energy "master plan" - published in 2011 with the assistance of Japanese donors and Tokyo Electric Power Co (Tepco) - recommended the building of a dozen coal plants around the country, which would help increase the country's generating capacity from 8GW in 2015 to 33GW by 2030.

Industry, including the crucial garment sector, suffers severe power shortages that it mitigates with the use of costly and polluting diesel generators. Heavy generators on upper floors are thought to have contributed to the collapse of the Rana Plaza building in 2013, which killed 1,100 garment workers.

Domestically produced natural gas provides 80 per cent of Bangladesh's electricity, but gasfields are fast being depleted and government regulations, including a ban on exports and subsidised prices, leading some of the lowest prices globally, have discouraged further exploration. The remaining electricity supply is generated by expensive diesel and furnace oil plants.

In spite of protests against new coal plants, Professor Ijaz Hossain of the Bangladesh University of Engineering Technology asks: "What choice do we have? It's either coal or nuclear. LNG [liquid natural gas] is too expensive." Rampal will use the most efficient "ultra supercritical" technology, exports of which are excluded from a recent OECD ban on coal technology trade.

Japan, which helped to write the energy master plan, is also involved in funding coal plants in Bangladesh. The $4bn Matarbari "energy hub" project, near the southern town of Cox's Bazar, will be mostly financed by Jica, the Japanese development agency. This will see an initial two 600MW coal plants operational at the site by 2026, and possibly two more by 2030.

In spite of the promise of relatively efficient coal plants, some Bangladeshis and foreign analysts suspect that foreign donors or suppliers will try to sell power station technology that will lock Bangladesh into a high-carbon economy for decades to come. Professor Saleemul Huq, director of the International Centre for Climate Change and Development, says "donors are trying to keep companies afloat by paying them" to provide Bangladesh with "the energy of the past".

Prof Huq says it would be better to save energy by improving the efficiency of transmission; losses through theft and technical problems can run as high as 50 per cent. Bangladesh, he insists, can "leapfrog" the centralised, fossil- fuel-reliant model of electricity supply and focus more on renewable energy.

The World Bank seems to agree. It has funded small rooftop solar systems for Bangladeshi homes and says more than 18m Bangladeshis use solar electricity.

Environmentalists worry not only about Bangladesh contributing to the global warming from which it will suffer, but about the immediate damage around plants such as Rampal.

Professor Anu Muhammad of Jahangirnagar University says Rampal will lead to a loss of mangrove cover as land grabbers follow the arrival of transport infrastructure in the area to seize terrain for land-hungry industries.

This, says Prof Muhammad, will threaten not only the flora and fauna, but also a natural barrier of marshland that protects millions of Bangladeshis from cyclones and the rising seas resulting from climate change.

Beijing's power play FT Big Read
