 WORLD NEWS, Monday, November 14, 2016 703 mots, p. 4

Saudi Arabia to press on with Paris accord pledges

Climate talks
By Pilita Clark in Marrakesh

Saudi Arabia says it will press ahead with pledges it made under the Paris climate change accord, even if president-elect Donald Trump pulls the US out of the global deal.

In an indication of how isolated the US may be if it abandons the climate agreement that virtually every country in the world struck last December, the largest oil exporter said the commitment of other big economies such as China underlined the accord's strength.

"The US is very important for the climate process, there is no doubt," a Saudi delegate told the FT at UN climate talks in the Moroccan city of Marrakesh, the first since the deal was adopted in Paris.

"But at the same time we need to recognise that the climate issue is a global issue . . . this process is resilient enough to move forward and China's comments are an example of that."

Chinese negotiators in Marrakesh have said there was a clear consensus to back the Paris deal and any shift in the US position would not derail Beijing's efforts to shift to a greener economy.

The Saudi delegate, who declined to be named, said the fact that so many countries had rushed to ratify the Paris deal was "a very nice surprise" that amounted to the icing on the cake.

"The US election means you have to eat it fast," he said, adding fossil fuel-rich Saudi Arabia had "no intention of watering down" its commitments.

Mr Trump, who will be inaugurated as US president in January, has called global warming a "hoax" created by China to weaken US manufacturers. His advisers say he is already looking at ways to withdraw from the Paris deal, Reuters reported over the weekend.

Much may depend on who the president-elect picks to lead bodies such as the US state department, whose officials helped negotiate the Paris accord, and the Environmental Protection Agency.

Mr Trump is reported to have chosen a prominent questioner of climate science, Myron Ebell of the libertarian Competitive Enterprise Institute think-tank, to his EPA transition team, raising hopes in the fossil fuel industry that like-minded figures will be chosen for other key posts.

The Paris accord has been hailed as an end to the fossil fuel era because it requires all countries to come up with climate action plans to curb emissions of greenhouse gases enough to prevent runaway global warming.

Saudi Arabia has pledged to install more solar panels and other renewable energy systems, as long as its economy grows, while the US has said it will cut its emissions by at least 26 per cent from 2005 levels over the next nine years.

Since his election victory, Mr Trump has reaffirmed his intention to boost fossil fuels and "end the war on coal" by scrapping President Obama's central climate plans.

However, Benjamin Sporton, head of the World Coal Association, warned such actions were unlikely to overcome the woes of the struggling US coal industry because the sector was primarily suffering from wider competitive pressures from cheaper natural gas.

"There are a good number of other countries that appear to remain pretty committed to the Paris agreement," Mr Sporton told the FT in Marrakesh.

He said he hoped a Trump administration might make it easier for countries to finance international coal projects than the Obama administration, but his association backed the Paris agreement pledges many countries had made to build cleaner coal-fired power stations.

The US election came on the second day of the two-week Marrakesh talks that last until November 18, and cast a shadow over the meeting, which is supposed to be working on the rules needed to make the Paris deal work.

Moroccan government organisers have acted to show the accord is still on track, drawing up a draft document inviting countries to "speed up" their climate actions. But these steps have been complicated because the Paris deal requires billions of dollars in public and private climate finance to be channelled from rich to poor countries and Mr Trump vowed to end US funds to UN climate programmes.

If the world's richest economy ditches its commitments, it will raise questions over how the accord proceeds.
