 WORLD NEWS, Thursday, November 17, 2016 505 mots, p. 2

UN summit clouded by threat to dismantle Paris accord

Global warming
By Pilita Clark in Marrakesh

The Kellogg and Mars food companies have joined Hewlett-Packard and more than 360 other businesses and investors to urge Donald Trump not to tear up the Paris climate accord when he takes office.

As Mr Trump's election victory oversha-dowed UN climate talks in the Moroccan capital, the DuPont chemicals group, the Nike sports goods company and the Starbucks coffee chain added their names to businesses warning that "failure to build a low-carbon economy puts American prosperity at risk".

Mr Trump has called global warming a "hoax" and has threatened to ditch the Paris accord that delegates are working to implement. However, the signatories have urged him to reconsider.

Matt Patsky, chief executive of Tril-lium Asset Management, the US investment firm, said business support for policies to address global warming "cannot be reversed and cannot be ignored by the Trump administration".

"That train has left the station, and to stand in its way is folly," he said.

Michael Kobori, vice-president of sustainability at Levi Strauss, the clothing company, said that "now more than ever" it was vital to back the Paris deal.

Their comments underline the concern Mr Trump's election has cast over the talks, but also a sense of determination among China, the EU and other nations to press on with plans to curb emissions.

John Kerry, US secretary of state, tried to reassure delegates yesterday that millions of Americans were still dedicated to tackling global warming.

"No one should doubt the overwhelming majority of the citizens of the US who know climate change is happening and our determination to keep our commitments that were made under Paris," he said.

"One of the things I've learnt is that some issues look a bit different when you are actually in office, compared to when you're on the campaign trail."

Still, the incoming Trump administration is expected to slash many of the climate actions President Barack Obama had promised for the Paris deal, raising questions about whether other countries will be willing or able to fill the gap left by a US withdrawal. It is also unclear how other multinationals will respond to the new administration. The list urging Mr Trump to hold to the Paris accord did not include many big companies that backed climate change efforts before his election, including Google, Apple, Goldman Sachs and other Wall Street banks.

Organisers of the list, which included Ceres, a non-profit sustainability group, said these companies had been approached but their absence did not suggest opposition, as the initiative had been done in a rush in a matter of days.

The Paris deal, sealed in December by nearly every nation, requires countries to draft a plan to curb climate change and update it so global temperature rises are kept "well below" 2C from pre-industrial times, or 1.5C if possible.

The World Meteorological Organisation said this week it was 95 per cent certain that 2016 would be the warmest year since records began in the 19th century.
