

Sunday, April 20, 2014

Financial Times (FT.com) • 483 words

Time to change the political climate



The past five years have been a bad time for those fighting against climate change. Since the chaotic failure of the Copenhagen climate summit in 2009, political leaders have been focused on other issues while the world pumps carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases into the atmosphere at an unprecedented rate. At the same time, although scientists point to growing evidence of climate change such as melting Arctic ice and more extreme weather, their arguments are undermined by the fact that the simplest measure of global warming - average temperature across the world - is not rising in line with earlier predictions.

In this difficult environment the UN Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change is publishing its fifth assessment - a series of reports produced by hundreds of authors running to many thousands of pages. Taken at face value, these reports should inject a new sense of urgency into the political process of reaching a binding global agreement to restrain the build-up of greenhouse gases.

Last month the IPCC analysed the dire impacts of climate change, from declining agricultural yields to water scarcity, heatwaves and reduced biodiversity. This month's report shows that carbon emissions continue to rise, driven by economic and population growth. Although it may still be possible to cap the global temperature rise to 2C, the internationally agreed target intended to avoid catastrophic effects, this will require a radical change in energy policy, with greatly increased investment in renewables, nuclear and energy efficiency.

Given that the reports represent middle of the road consensus statements by a huge contingent of scientists, economists and others, it makes sense to take their findings seriously. Indeed some experts, including climate economist Lord Nicholas Stern, feel that the IPCC should have warned more strongly about the dangers of delay and the risks of unmanaged warming.

Yet the IPCC faces extraordinary - almost visceral - hostility in some quarters. A sceptical minority seems to regard it as a self-serving conspiracy designed to trick governments into spending billions of dollars more on climate research. Nothing short of a sensational rise in global temperature is likely to win them over.

More realistic is the prospect of enthusing the majority, who accept the reality of man-made climate change but are rather apathetic about tackling it. This will require a quality of writing and argument in the "synthesis" report - which the IPCC plans to bring out in the autumn as the final offering in this fifth assessment process - that exceeds anything produced so far.

In particular the economic cost benefit analysis of climate change and its mitigation needs improvement. The most recent report gave a reassuringly low figure for the cost of an ambitious fight against global warming: it would shave between 0.04 and 0.14 percentage points off annualised economic growth, which is assumed to be 1.6 to 3 per cent under a "business as usual" scenario. But there has been no meaningful attempt to compare this with the costs (or benefits) of climate change itself.

Of course, the science and technology, politics and economics of climate change are immensely complex. But it should still be possible to present the risks, benefits and options for action more clearly in good time for the next really big event in the climate calendar - a summit in Paris at the end of 2015, which is meant to achieve the comprehensive and legally binding global agreement that the Copenhagen event failed to reach.

Although failure in Paris would still leave scope for action by individual nations, regions and cities, the battle against climate change must rest on the bedrock of international co-operation.

