

Monday, February 17, 2014

Financial Times • London Ed1 • p. 2 • 425 words

Floods propel climate change
debate

By Jim Pickard and Pilita Clark

Miliband warns of complacencyHomes at risk set to double by 2020s

Nom de la source
Financial Times
Type de source
Presse • Journaux
Périodicité
Quotidien
Couverture géographique
Internationale
Provenance
Londres, Grand Londres, Royaume-Uni

The floods and storms of the past month have prompted a fresh Westminster row over climate change even as official figures predict the number of flood-prone homes will double to as many as 800,000 by the 2020s.

Ed Miliband, the Labour party leader, warned Britain yesterday it was "sleepwalking into a national security disaster" for failing to reach a political consensus, even though "the science is clear" on the reality of climate change .

Mr Miliband, who since 2010 has been quiet on the subject, has carefully timed his re-entry into the debate as thousands of households are flooded or without power. His comments seem to be a deliberate political salvo against the Conservatives, home to many climate change sceptics. Lord Lawson , the former Tory chancellor, told the Financial Times no one knew if the weather was changing.

"There has been all sorts of bad weather in the past. This is nothing new," he said. "Every prediction so far that the alarmists have made has been falsified."

Defra, the environment department, has predicted that the number of residential properties in England and Wales at "significant likelihood of flooding" will jump by the next decade. These affected homes will rise from 370,000 to 500,000-800,000, the ministry wrote in the small print of its climate change assessment report in 2012.

The department said the forecast was based on a scenario with no preventive action. "We are investing heavily in flood defences."

Amid calls for ministers to reconsider the number of homes being built on flood plains, Mark Wilson, chief executive of insurer Aviva, called in The Sunday Telegraph for houses to be given a "flood rating", so that potential buyers were made aware of the risk.

Insurers have paid out more than £5bn to British homes and companies hit by flooding since 2000, compared with just £1.5bn in real terms over the previous decade. Today, David Cameron will unveil a £10m package of support to help small and medium-sized companies meet clean-up costs and keep trading after the storms.

Guy Shrubsole, a campaigner at Friends of the Earth, said Defra's own figures suggested the problem would only worsen, with even more pressure on insurers and households.

Mr Miliband's intervention underlines how the extreme winter weather has fast become a flashpoint in the debate on climate change. The debate is not just rhetorical for ministers such as Ed Davey, the Liberal Democrat energy secretary, whose multibillion-pound programme of green energy subsidies is often attacked by Tory sceptics.

"We can see around us today the possible consequences of a world in which extreme weather events are much more likely," Mr Davey said last week.

His comments drew a swift riposte from Michael Fallon, the Conservative energy minister, who said: "Unthinking climate change worship has damaged British industry and put up consumer bills."

But the number of people who think the "environment" is the biggest cause of concern has jumped from 6 per cent to 23 per cent in a month, according to pollsters YouGov.

