 WORLD NEWS, Tuesday, November 15, 2016 673 mots, p. 4

US urged to keep faith in Paris climate deal

Marrakesh talks
By Pilita Clark in Marrakesh

The EU has sent a thinly veiled message to Donald Trump that the US risks a backlash from other countries if the president-elect pulls America out of the Paris climate accord.

"At the moment we are sending the Americans the message that it's in the interests of the US to deliver clean energy policies and ambitious climate change policies," Miguel Arias Cañete, EU climate and energy commissioner, said at UN climate talks in Marrakesh yesterday.

But in a sign of the growing frustration pervading the Moroccan meeting in the wake of Mr Trump's election win last week, Mr Arias Cañete added: "We are in a positive attitude, not a negative attitude - at the moment, under present circumstances."

The commissioner was responding to questions about a suggestion from Nicolas Sarkozy, France's former president, that Europe impose a carbon tax on US imports if Mr Trump pulls out of the Paris deal struck by nearly 200 nations in December.

His suggestion ricocheted around the makeshift meeting halls at the Marrakesh talks, where delegates have been rocked by the election of a man who has called climate change a "hoax" and is reportedly already looking at how to exit the Paris accord as soon as possible.

While economists are generally divided about border taxes of any nature, Nicholas Stern, professor of economics and government at the London School of Economics, said a case could be made for them under some circumstances.

"In principle, border tax adjustments can be justified in cases where companies are being heavily subsidised by their country's government," said Prof Stern, author of a 2006 report on the economics of climate change. "Allowing damaging activities, such as air pollution or greenhouse gas emissions, to take place at zero cost is clearly an implicit subsidy," he told the FT.

Jonathan Pershing, US climate envoy, who has been in the difficult position of representing the outgoing Obama administration in Marrakesh, said it appeared that other governments were "holding judgment" on how to respond to the incoming Trump presidency.

Meanwhile new data revealed that a dramatic spike in global temperatures has put 2016 on track to be the hottest year since records began in the 19th century and close to the 1.5C of warming that the Paris climate accord is supposed to prevent.

Average temperatures this year have soared to 1.2C above what they were before the industrial revolution as warming reached what World Meteorological Organisation officials said were "very alarming" levels around the world. The record rise will mean 16 of the 17 hottest years on record have been this century, with the other one being 1998.

The Paris agreement aims to keep future temperature rises "well below" 2C from pre-industrial times and if possible only 1.5C.

Petteri Taalas, WMO secretarygeneral, said it was still "theoretically possible" to meet the accord's 1.5C goal. But doing this would, he said, require a "very dramatic" fall in global emissions of carbon dioxide, the greenhouse gas produced when fossil fuels are burned.

Mr Taalas said the warming this year had been striking, with temperatures in parts of Arctic Russia reaching 6C to 7C above long-term averages and 3C higher in Arctic sections of Alaska and Canada.

The WMO listed other striking events that had occurred as global warming surged, including:fierce heatwaves that set records in southern Africa, Thailand, India and the Middle East; deadly storms including Hurricane Matthew in Haiti;droughts in several parts of the world; and an above average rise in sea levels and "significant" melting of the Greenland ice sheet.

A separate group of scientists released data yesterday showing global emissions of carbon dioxide from fossil fuels has stayed nearly flat for the last three years, despite the absence of a global economic downturn that normally leads to such a slump.

But scientists cautioned that emissions would need to fall sharply, rather than slow down, if the Paris agreement's goals are to be met. 