

Tuesday, March 11, 2014

Financial Times (FT.com) • 372 words

Idea of benefits in climate change
completely wrong, says UK's chief
scientists

By Pilita Clark, Environment Correspondent



The idea that the benefits of climate change will outweigh any risks is "completely wrong", according to the government scientist who advises the cabinet on the latest state of knowledge on global warming.

"Whilst there may be trivial benefits in some parts of the world for some of the time, the long-term direction for all of us is a negative direction," said Sir Mark Walport, the UK's chief scientific adviser.

Sir Mark was responding to MPs' questions in a Commons committee about claims by the peer and science journalist, Matt Ridley, author of The Rational Optimist, that climate change is likely to do more good than harm for most of this century.

"I understand the point he's making but I think he's completely wrong, unfortunately," said Sir Mark, adding brusquely: "He describes himself as a rational optimist. I'm not sure about the rational bit."

Sir Mark was giving evidence to a Commons inquiry into the latest assessment by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), issued in September.

He defended the report's central finding, that man-made emissions of greenhouse gases are raising global temperatures, and brushed aside suggestions that governments could wait for climate models to improve before tackling climate change.

"The question is, when do you take out fire insurance? If you take out your fire insurance by the time the first storey of your house is in flames, then you're a bit late," said Sir Mark.

"The metaphor I use is, what price a grandchild? And if not what price a grandchild, then what price a grandchild's grandchild?"

Some critics say the models climate scientists have used to predict the rate of future warming are flawed because some failed to take account of a slowdown in the rate of global warming over the past decade.

However, David MacKay, chief scientific adviser to the energy department, told the same committee that while the models used in IPCC reports were not perfect, they were steadily improving and had in fact underestimated the extent at which parts of the climate are changing.

Most of the models used in the IPCC's previous report, issued in 2007, had failed to predict how fast Arctic sea ice would be lost since then, Prof Mackay said, while some had erred on the low side when projecting global sea level rises.

"It's acknowledged by the climate community that in many ways their models are not perfect and in some cases those imperfections are leading to an under-prediction of climate change," he said.

However, it would be "utterly inappropriate" to decide to defer action on climate change until there was perfectly hard evidence of all aspects of the issue, he said.
