 Thursday, December 1, 2016 - 00:02Z 557 mots

Global warming likely to turn UK into top wine producer, study finds
Pilita Clark, Environment Correspondent

Fancy a glass of crisp Edinburgh Riesling? How about a drop of Margate Merlot or a cheeky little Sauvignon Blanc from Essex?

Forget Château Petrus. Château Cheshire is on its way, according to researchers who forecast that large areas of Britain could become improbable wine-producing centres of excellence because of global warming.

Growing Pinot Grigio as far north as the Scottish borders or Chardonnay in Shropshire is a real possibility as UK temperatures rise and rainfall patterns change, said Mark Maslin, a professor of climatology at University College London.

"Malbec is the one we are most shocked by," he said, referring to the popular red wine from Argentina and the south of France made from a grape variety that needs a lot of heat and sunlight.

"For anybody who knows their wines, if you talk about Malbec and say it's possible in the Thames Valley, they are going to go: really? I don't believe this," said Professor Maslin. But his study, commissioned by the Laithwaite's wine merchants, suggested this could occur if British temperatures increase by 2.2C by 2100.

Prof Maslin cautioned that climate change alone is not going to be enough to turn the UK into a rival to Bordeaux overnight, since winemaking is "as much an art as a science" and also depends on other factors such as soil conditions, slopes and drainage.

And in France, wine experts predicted the research would not leave vignerons quaking. "I think they would probably find it quite amusing more than anything else," said Iain Munson, a British winemaker based in Languedoc, one of the world's best known wine-producing regions.

"I wouldn't think anyone in most of France would actually believe wine was made in England, full stop," he said. "It's like what we British think of French rock music."

In fact, south-east England has been producing award-winning sparkling wines for many years. Mr Munson said he had used some of them in blind tasting sessions where French wine lovers had enjoyed them.

"When you tell them it's English wine they are pretty much gobsmacked," he said.

There was no reason why the UK should not be able to produce excellent wines in future, he added, potentially even for export.

But if global warming is the reason for this, it far from uniformly good news, said Prof Maslin. "If the British Isles has the climate of south-west France, it means other places in the world are also shifting by equally dramatic amounts," he said.

Temperatures high enough to grow Merlot in Margate, for example, may make it impossible to grow important food crops such as wheat.

Scientists also predict climate change will cause more extreme weather.

That is one reason nearly every country in the world agreed to the Paris climate deal last December, which aims to cut fossil fuel pollution enough to keep average global temperatures rises well below 2C from pre-industrial times.

Prof Maslin said if countries stick to the initial pledges made for the Paris accord and then progressively upgrade them, as the pact requires, some of the predictions made for British wine-growing would not be achieved. But it is far from clear this will happen. 