 WORLD NEWS, Friday, December 9, 2016 600 mots, p. 4

Experts play down Trump impact on climate

Environmental agency
By Pilita Clark in London

US threat to pull out of Paris accord would have minimal effect, says PwC

Donald Trump has sent his clearest message yet about his plans for reshaping US policy on global warming by choosing a chief environmental regulator who has questioned the science of climate change

But leading experts say the nomination of Scott Pruitt, Oklahoma's attorney-general, as head of the Environmental Protection Agency and the policy he pursues may have less effect than many imagine on global greenhouse gas emissions.

Mr Trump had sent a different signal earlier this week when he met two prominent climate change campaigners at his New York office: first Al Gore, former US vice-president, then the Hollywood actor Leonardo DiCaprio.

Even as the meeting with Mr DiCaprio took place on Wednesday it emerged that Mr Trump had picked Mr Pruitt for the position at the EPA, which has been at the forefront of US efforts to rein in fossil fuel pollution. The president-elect's decision prompted outraged howls from green advocates and approval from the fossil fuel industry.

Mr Pruitt has spent much time fighting the agency he has been nominated to lead over its Clean Power Plan, a hallmark of the Obama administration's efforts to cut greenhouse gas emissions from the electricity sector.

He has also raised doubts about climate change, writing in May that the debate over global warming "is far from settled" and claiming scientists continue to disagree about "its connection to the actions of mankind".

His nomination suggests Mr Trump, who has called global warming a hoax, is likely to follow through on his campaign pledge to pull the US out of the Paris agreement that commits almost every nation to take some form of action on climate change.

Since his November 8 election victory, Mr Trump has been vague about whether he will take such a step. He told The New York Times he would "take a look at it", adding he believed there was "some connectivity" between human activity and climate change.

Whatever he chooses to do, he may be constrained by market movements and technological developments.

Analysis by PwC, the financial services group, shows G20 countries need to reduce their carbon intensity - the amount of carbon dioxide they emit for every dollar of gross domestic product they produce - by an annual average of 3 per cent to meet their Paris agreement targets.

Even if the US abandoned the deal it would have a limited direct impact on the overall G20 effort. If all other countries stayed on track to meet their carbon targets, but the US returned to business as usual, the average annual cut for the G20 as a whole would fall only slightly, from 3 per cent to 2.8 per cent.

That is chiefly because of market developments such as the US shale gas boom that has squeezed out coal, the dirtiest fossil fuel, a situation some think unlikely to change no matter what Mr Trump does.

"The impact on the global emissions projection is pretty small even if the US shelves its Paris target," said Jonathan Grant of PwC. He emphasised the contribution of market and technological shifts to tackling emissions, adding: "It's doubtful that can be thrown into reverse by one country." But he said: "The message the US sends on climate is more important than the maths."

Benjamin Sporton, chief executive of the World Coal Association, said he hoped the Trump administration would apply pollution rules more evenly so the industry in the US could "operate on a level playing field".
