  Wednesday, December 16, 2015  Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 14 • 435 words 
 Miners under pressure over climate risks  Mining  
Bg James Wilson, Mining Correspondent  Rio, Anglo American and Glencore face investor calls after Paris agreement  Investors want a trio of the world's  largest miners to make greater disclosure of risks associated with climate change, after this month's Paris agreement to limit global warming.  Rio Tinto, Anglo American and Glencore could face shareholder votes next year on whether they should reveal more about how their businesses might perform in a low-carbon world.  The targeting of the mining companies, which are among the largest UK-listed miners of coal, comes after a coalition of investors succeeded in winning similar votes at BP and Shell at their shareholder meetings this year.  Both boards at the groups supported the shareholder resolutions, which were approved with 98 per cent in favour and became binding on the companies.  Glencore said yesterday that it would support the resolution that investors in the Aiming for A coalition intend to put to its annual meeting in May.  Anglo said it was also likely to support a resolution, while Rio said it had had "constructive" talks with the group.  The Paris deal on climate change under lines the growing expectation that companies depending substantially on fossil fuels including coal miners, oil producers and power generators will have to adapt their businesses over the longer term.  "Investors need to revisit their stewardship of companies and companies need to look hard at their business plans for climate change," said Edward Mason, head of responsible investment at the Church Commissioners, which manages investments for the Church of England. The church is one of the members of the Aiming for A group.  The investor coalition includes other private asset managers and the Local Authority Pension Fund Forum. They say they want to make sure their longterm investments are protected against the impact of climate change .  Helen Wildsmith, of CCLA, a specialist investment manager involved with the Aiming for A group, said the investors so far backing the resolutions have a combined $4tn under management.  Resolutions would demand that Glencore, Anglo and Rio show "strategic resilience". Each miner would have to report what it was doing to manage carbon   emissions and also how its assets would perform under various scenarios.  The resolutions would also require companies to disclose whether climate change considerations played any part in incentives for executives.  Glencore said it would support such a resolution while Anglo said it expected it would. Rio said disclosure on climate change risk "is under constant review to ensure we are in line with best practice and are disclosing information that is beneficial to our shareholders and other stakeholders".    