Leading Article: Climate change: Smell the coffee while you canThe members of the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change are purveyors of doom. Their report, looking at the impact on the global way of life of increases in average temperatures of 2C or more over the pre-industrial average, is no easy read. But after the past few months of weather - floods in the UK, drought in California and extreme blizzards in New York - its message will only be disregarded by the most sceptical of sceptics (stand up Tony Abbott, prime minister of Australia). Climate change, the panel warns, will bring at the very least many more extreme weather events. It will probably threaten food security and it will certainly influence what can be grown where. It is a careful, nuanced attempt to wake people up to the news that quite soon they won't be able to smell the coffee because it will have become a rare and costly luxury.In our interview this weekend, Ed Davey, the energy and climate change secretary, insisted that the coalition's climate activists had won the day. Whatever David Cameron was reported as saying about green crap, regardless of chancellor George Osborne's reluctance for Britain to stick its neck out, the 2008 Climate Change Act's ambitious targets were on course. It is, however, very much easier to will the ends than it is to accept the means. That political truism was illustrated recently in an innovative series of day-long sessions run by the DECC which challenged a self-selected audience to consider emissions-cutting options available in their own city. The results confirmed that, even though it was the most effective answer, there was a definite aversion to risking economic growth. Even allowing for some forceful criticisms of the options available (not enough nuclear, for example) in the design of the model - it is open for anyone to try online - it was unmistakable evidence of the political challenge ahead.Successive governments have demonstrated some ways of trying to influence behaviour that hardly help at all. The least difficult way of reducing emissions is cutting demand, and the best way of doing that is to improve insulation so that homes can be heated for less. But the green deal that the coalition introduced has in practice proved so complex to understand, and carries the risk of becoming so burdensome, that take-up has barely reached the hundreds. The other leg of the policy, the potentially transformative energy companies obligation, a mix of green and social levies, had after a year significantly increased the number of homes with wall and roof insulation, but then in December the government rowed back on the obligation so that energy companies could be persuaded to ease up on price increases. Meanwhile, incentives designed to encourage the use of renewables like solar panels came and went with disincentivising unpredictability, damaging confidence among both suppliers and consumers.Next month the IPCC, having reassessed the science and evaluated impacts, will publish the third and final part of its septennial review, the actions it believes are necessary to adapt to and, as far as possible, to avert climate change. UK politicians will have to consider what and how to implement them in the context of a shaky economic recovery and - because of the confused and uncertain message from governments over the past 20 years - a serious challenge to energy security. Perhaps the big lesson of recent months is that increasing the price of all forms of energy as a matter of policy to reduce demand is not a sustainable option. In some parts of the country, driving is unavoidable. For too many households, the amount of energy they consume is already at the barest minimum and price rises are simply unaffordable. Automatic price escalation is not an appropriate part of the mix of strategies for any government. On the other hand, some unpalatable interim measures may have to be accepted. They definitely include nuclear, and they may have to include fracking too. That will be much easier if there is both some consensus about objectives and a genuinely open debate about how to achieve them.