The Guardian (UK) Friday, April 11, 2014 - 00:01 UTC -0400Comment: Why the US gas sector is licking its lips over Ukraine: Comment & Debate: From climate change to Crimea, the fracking industry is supreme at exploiting crisis - what I call the shock doctrineNaomi KleinThe way to beat Vladimir Putin is to flood the European market with fracked-in-the-USA natural gas, or so the industry would have us believe. As part of escalating anti-Russian hysteria, two bills have been introduced into the US Congress that attempt to fast-track liquefied natural gas (LNG) exports, all in the name of helping Europe to wean itself from Putin's fossil fuels, and enhancing US national security.According to Cory Gardner, the Republican congressman who introduced the House of Representatives bill, "opposing this legislation is like hanging up on a 911 call from our friends and allies". And that might be true - as long as your friends and allies work at Chevron and Shell, and the emergency is the need to keep profits up amid dwindling supplies of conventional oil and gas.For this ploy to work, it's important not to look too closely at details. Like the fact that much of the gas probably won't make it to Europe - because what the bills allow is for gas to be sold on the world market to any country belonging to the World Trade Organisation.Or the fact that for years the industry has been selling the message that Americans must accept the risks to their land, water and air that come with hydraulic fracturing (fracking) in order to help their country achieve "energy independence". And now, suddenly and slyly, the goal has been switched to "energy security", which apparently means selling a temporary glut of fracked gas on the world market, thereby creating energy dependencies abroad.And most of all, it's important not to notice that building the infrastructure necessary to export gas on this scale would take many years in permitting and construction. By the time these massive industrial projects are up and running, Germany and Russia may well be fast friends. But by then few will remember that the crisis in Crimea was the excuse seized upon by the gas industry to make its longstanding export dreams come true, regardless of the consequences to the communities getting fracked or to the planet getting cooked.I call this knack for exploiting crisis for private gain the shock doctrine, and it shows no signs of retreating: during times of crisis, whether real or manufactured, our elites are able to ram through unpopular policies that are detrimental to the majority under cover of emergency. Plenty of industries are good at this ploy, but none is more adept at exploiting the rationality-arresting properties of crisis than the global gas sector.For the past four years the gas lobby has used the economic crisis in Europe to tell countries like Greece that the way out of debt and desperation is to open their beautiful and fragile seas to drilling. And it has employed similar arguments to rationalise fracking across North America and the United Kingdom.Now the crisis du jour is conflict in Ukraine, being used as a battering ram to knock down sensible restrictions on natural gas exports and push through a controversial free-trade deal with Europe. It's quite a deal: more corporate free-trade polluting economies and more heat-trapping gases polluting the atmosphere - all as a response to an energy crisis that is largely manufactured.And it's worth remembering - irony of ironies - that the crisis the natural gas industry has been most adept at exploiting is   itself.Never mind that the industry's singular solution to the climate crisis is to dramatically expand an extraction process in fracking that releases massive amounts of climate-destabilising methane into our atmosphere. Methane is one of the most potent greenhouse gases - 34 times more powerful at trapping heat than carbon dioxide, according to the latest estimates by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. And that is over a 100-year period, with methane's power dwindling over time.It's far more relevant, argues the Cornell University biochemist Robert Howarth, to look at the 15- to 20-year range, when methane has a global-warming potential that is a staggering 86-100 times greater than carbon dioxide. And remember: you don't build multibillion-dollar pieces of infrastructure unless you plan on using them for at least 40 years. So we are responding to our warming planet by constructing a network of ultra-powerful atmospheric ovens. Are we mad?Not that we know how much methane is actually released by drilling and fracking and all their infrastructure. Even while the natural gas industry touts its "lower than coal!" carbon dioxide emissions, it has never systematically measured its fugitive methane leaks. The gas industry itself, in 1981, came up with the clever pitch that natural gas was a "bridge" to a clean energy future. That was 33 years ago.And in 1988 - the year that the climatologist James Hansen warned Congress, in historic testimony, about the urgent problem of global warming - the American Gas Association began to explicitly frame its product as a response to the "greenhouse effect".The industry's use of Ukraine to expand its global market under the banner of "energy security" must be seen in the context of this uninterrupted record of crisis opportunism. Only this time many more of us know where true energy security lies. Thanks to the work of top researchers such as Mark Jacobson and his Stanford team, we know that the world can, by 2030, power itself entirely with renewables. And thanks to the latest, alarming reports from the IPCC, we know that doing so is now an existential imperative.It's up to Europeans to turn their desire for emancipation from Russian gas into a demand for an accelerated transition to renewables. Such a transition - to which European nations are committed under the Kyoto protocol - can easily be sabotaged if the world is flooded with cheap fossil fuels fracked from the US bedrock. Responding to the threat of catastrophic warming is our most pressing energy imperative. And we simply can't afford to be distracted by the natural gas industry's latest crisis-fuelled marketing ploy.