The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Monday, April 14, 2014, p. 4Fracking 'could help avoid climate change'Emily Gosden, Energy EditorUN CLIMATE chiefs say fracking could be part of the solution to global warming – but a massive expansion of green energy is still needed to prevent devastating extremes of climate change.A report by the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) found it was still just possible to limit the rise in average global temperatures to 3.6F (2C) by 2100, the level beyond which experts say the effects will be "dangerous".The IPCC warns that sticking within the limit will be a "huge challenge", requiring urgent global action.Energy production, industry and transport systems must be transformed to cut greenhouse gas emissions, which have been rising ever–faster despite policies supposed to tackle climate change.The world must at least treble its use of green and low–carbon sources of power, such as solar farms, wind farms and nuclear reactors by 2050. However, the report finds there is also a role for gas to replace dirtier coal plants.Ottmar Edenhofer, the co–chairman of the working group that drew up the report, said it was "quite clear" that shale gas, extracted through the controversial process of fracking, can be "consistent with low carbon development".The comments are likely to be seized upon by British proponents of fracking, including George Osborne.However, environmental groups believe that fossil fuels should be left in the ground.The IPCC report says greenhouse gas emissions can be reduced by replacing coal–fired power plants with modern, natural gas power plants.Mr Edenhofer said the shale gas revolution could be "very helpful" but only if world leaders were determined to tackle   and did not simply burn more gas as well as coal.In the long term, burning gas for power will only help to tackle climate change if power plants are fitted with "carbon capture and storage" (CCS) technology to trap and bury the harmful emissions. "What a 2C (3.6F) scenario means is the phase–out of fossil fuel without CCS entirely, [at the] latest in the next few decades," Mr Edenhofer said.However, the viability of carbon capture is not yet proven. Critics fear that building a new wave of gas plants would see Britain "locked in" to higher emissions for much longer.The IPCC says that global greenhouse gas emissions must be lowered by 40 to 70 per cent compared with 2010 by the middle of the century, and reduced to almost zero by the end of this century.Carbon dioxide may also need to be sucked out of the atmosphere to achieve a sustainable balance.Rajendra K Pachuari, the chairman of the IPCC, said the report showed that to meet the 2C target the world must unite to reduce emissions.Without any action, global temperatures might increase by 8.6F (4.8C). Critics say green energy is too expensive, with wind, solar and nuclear power currently all dependent on huge subsidies paid for by consumers.The report acknowledges that the costs of tackling climate change would hit economic growth, causing global consumption in 2050 to be about 3.4 per cent lower than without the changes.However, Pete Smith, of the University of Aberdeen, one of the report's authors, said this equated to the growth that might have been expected by 2050 being delayed to 2051 or 2052.The report does not try to compare the costs of going green with the benefits of avoiding the disastrous impacts of climate change.An earlier report by the IPCC warned of floods, food shortages and deadly heatwaves that were likely to result if emissions continued to rise.The report finds that delaying efforts to tackle climate change now would only make it more expensive to do so later.Mr Edenhofer said: "Achieving this goal is a huge technological, institutional challenge."