The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Friday, January 31, 2014, p. 6,7Winter deluges may become the normFloodingBy Gordon Rayner, Chief ReporterBRITAIN should brace itself for even soggier winters in future, according to climate change projections which show that the country will get warmer and wetter over the next 20 years.Average winter temperatures will rise by as much as 5.4F (3C) by 2035, with rainfall increasing by up to 12 per cent, the first projections for regional climate change suggested.As more heavy rain, high tides and gale force winds were forecast to bring further flooding to parts of Britain this weekend, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change published its final report breaking down the impact of global warming for individual areas. It is the first time it has brought climate models together to make seasonal and regional projections.For northern Europe the maximum rise projected by models suggested a maximum 5.4F (3C) rise for the winter months of December, January and February. However it is more likely temperatures will rise by the mean of 2.3F (1.3C) by 2035. The summer months could also warm by a maximum of 4.6F (2.6C), although a mean of 1.6F (0.9C) is more likely, the IPCC said.Britain will also see greater rainfall in the next two decades, with a maximum of 12 per cent more rainfall and an average rise of 4 per cent.Dr Peter Stott, the head of climate monitoring and attribution at the Met Of–fice Hadley Centre, agreed that Britain is likely to see wetter and warmer temperatures in future."We are seeing more extreme temperatures and more intense rainfall events around the world," he said."The expectation in a warming world is for an increased frequency of heatwaves and greater moisture in a warmer atmosphere is expected to lead extreme precipitation events, more intense and more frequent."Yesterday forecasters warned that there was no end to the current spell of wet weather. Coastal areas of the South West and Wales, and parts of the Midlands near the River Severn, will be worst affected this weekend, with well over an inch of rain expected in some areas today and more to follow tomorrow.Winds gusting up to 70mph could cause damage to properties in western areas.The Environment Agency had 37 flood warnings (flooding is expected) and 163 flood alerts (flooding is possible) in place.Helen Chivers, a forecaster at the Met Office, said: "Because the rain over the next few days comes on top of the recordbreaking rain we have had in January, it brings the risk of more flooding."In coastal areas we are asking people to be aware of very big waves crashing into promenades. There will be high tides, combined with tidal surges and strong winds which can be really dangerous. People should stay away from the coast. And I'm afraid there's another band of rain coming in on Monday, with this really unsettled weather continuing next week."As members of the Armed Forces went to the Somerset Levels to help people cut off by flood water, the Met Office con–firmed that January has been the wettest on record for parts of southern England.The UK as a whole has received 6.5in (164.6mm) of rain in January, 35 per cent above the long–term average, with 6.9in (175.2mm) in South East and Central England, more than twice the regional average and the highest since records began in 1910. Today a band of heavy rain will sweep across the country from west to east, with 0.8 to 1.2 inches (20mm to 30mm) falling on some areas, including Dartmoor, and as much as 1.6 inches (40mm) on high ground.The Environment Agency said coastal and tidal areas of Cornwall, Devon, Dorset, Somerset, Bristol and South Gloucestershire were all at an increased risk of flooding. The rest of Gloucestershire, parts of the South East, the North West and the Yorkshire coast will also be affected by wind, rain and high tides in the next few days. Of the 37 flood warnings, 17 were in the Midlands, all but one of those along the River Severn.Editorial Comment: Page 21Forecast What lies in store for next five daysTodayHeavy rain will come in from the west and arrive in all areas by early evening. The South West is likely to see the heaviest showers. It will feel cold through the day, with highs of 46F (8C) in the South.TomorrowFeeling cold, blustery winds and more heavy showers in the South, with highs of 48F (9C), dropping as low as 39F (4C) overnight.SundayThere will be a break in the rain, with sunny spells throughout the country. Blustery winds will persist, temperatures up to 48F (9C). Northern areas will feel cold overnight, with lows of 37F (3C).MondayIt will remain fairly dry but there will still be a risk of rain showers later in the day. Still quite windy.TuesdayFurther rain showers will be interspersed with sunny spells. Highs of 52F (11C).NORTH EAST Flood warnings 15 NORTH WEST THREAT LEVEL 16 Flood warning Flood alert MIDLANDS 17 19 WALES ANGLIA 48 13 SOUTH WEST 8 21 SOUTH EAST 5 101 Source: The Environment Agency