USA Today Thursday, June 1, 2017 - 21:10 UTC -0400World leaders slam Trump's moveBy Jessica Durando, and Oren Dorell, USA TODAYWorld leaders condemned President Trump's decision Thursday to pull out of the Paris climate agreement.Although the president said he was willing to work for a better deal, France, Italy and Germany said in a joint statement that the accord can not be renegotiated.German Chancellor Angela Merkel, French President Emmanuel Macron and Italian Prime Minister Paolo Gentiloni urged allies to "speed up" efforts to fight against climate change and said they would do more to help poorer countries.Paris City Hall was illuminated in green Thursday night after Trump's announcement.Canadian Prime Minister Justin Trudeau took to Twitter to criticize the president's decision, saying his country is "deeply disappointed.""We are all custodians of this world, and that is why Canada will continue to work with the U.S. at the state level, and with other U.S. stakeholders, to address climate change and promote clean growth," Trudeau said in a statement.Scotland's First Minister Nicola Sturgeon called the decision "irresponsible."Prime Minister of Denmark Lars Rasmussen said it was a "sad day for the world."Former Mexican president Vincente Fox tweeted that Trump has "surrendered the hopes and future of a nation.""He's declaring war on the planet itself," Fox added.Belgian Prime Minister Charles Michel also weighed in: "I condemn this brutal act. ... Leadership means fighting climate changetogether. Not forsaking commitment."Earlier Thursday, Russia said it supported the climate agreement. "President (Vladimir) Putin signed this convention in Paris. Russia attaches great significance to it," Kremlin spokesman Dmitry Peskov said in a call with reporters, the Independent reported. "At the same time, it goes without saying that the effectiveness of this convention is likely to be reduced without its key participants."In China, premier Li Keqiang promised to work with the EU to uphold the accord, saying there is a "global consensus" and an "international responsibility" to fight climate change, the Associated Press reported. "China in recent years has stayed true to its commitment," he said in Berlin.* 