The Guardian (UK) Saturday, April 5, 2014 - 00:01 UTC -0400'I didn't do this because I thought it was fun': Caroline Lucas, the UK's first Green MP, has plenty to worry about - choking air pollution, dire climate-change warnings, scant progress on renewables, and her trial after an anti-fracking protest - but she's positively Pollyannaish: Caroline Lucas interviewThe Saturday interview By Decca AitkenheadCaroline Lucas was standing for parliament the last time we met, and this time round she's standing trial. As far as I can establish, she's the first sitting MP to be prosecuted over a matter of principle since a Labour member refused to pay the poll tax 25 years ago - and she hasn't even been in the Commons for a full term yet. But her reason for risking arrest is exactly the same as the reason she ran for election: she is frightened that we're heading for environmental Armageddon. It's not exactly a reason to be cheerful - and we meet in her Brighton constituency this week just as air pollution began swaddling the country, only hours after the latest IPCC report warned that climate change is already wreaking havoc on the planet, causing heatwaves and floods. But if she was relentlessly cheerful last time round, this time she's practically Pollyannaish.Lucas must wait until 17 April for her trial to conclude, when she will discover whether magistrates find her guilty or not of causing an obstruction during an anti-fracking protest last summer in Balcombe - so there are some legal constraints on what she can say now.But the more striking constraints are political, and she's stuck with them, regardless of the verdict. As the country's first Green party MP, Lucas cannot afford to say that voters will have to forego some luxuries to combat climate change, because turkeys don't vote for Christmas. She can't acknowledge that Brighton's Green-led council may well have muffed up her re-election chances by making some howlingly unpopular mistakes. "Um, it's maybe made it a bit more challenging." She can't risk telling us bluntly that we're losing the fight against climate change, because then everyone would give up trying. And for obvious reasons, she can't say she was glad that so many of us spent the winter under water. "But I can say that I hope it will have been a wake-up call." What Lucas has to be is resolutely optimistic - and she is, doggedly, with a sort of heroic determination.Why she is on trial is still a puzzle to Lucas. She and other protesters had been sitting on a small off-road driveway in Balcombe for five hours last August, and were talking about leaving, when the police decided to arrest them. "Another 15 minutes and we'd probably all have been gone." So she is angry about that, but glad to be on trial, "to the extent that the coverage can be about fracking. I was pleased about the protest overall, in the sense that it did put the spotlight again on fracking. If you look at opinion polls before and after that summer of protest, the numbers against fracking were much higher by the end, so I think it really raised awareness." A local councillor told her that when the planning permission for Cuadrilla first went through in Balcombe, they didn't really know what fracking was, "And it felt really important to make sure that could never be a reason again."For Lucas, the big problem with fracking has nothing to do with the risk that it will cause earthquakes, contaminate the water table or pollute the soil. In fact, she thinks it possible that stringent regulations could minimise those risks. "It's not that fracking itself is necessarily worse than ordinary gas extraction. It's the fact that we're just about to put into place a whole new infrastructure for a whole new fossil-fuel industry, at exactly the time when we need to be reducing our emissions." The problem, in other words, is climate change.Some environmentalists argue that shale gas is the obvious answer to our energy needs, until we've worked out how to power the country with renewables. Lucas accepts that we do need gas to tide us over, "but I would prefer to keep importing it from Norway, for example, because it will be easier to turn that tap off than it would be to dismantle an entire new industry that we had deliberately incentivised. That's why Balcombe felt so important, because it is literally on the frontline."It is a total myth, she insists, that fracking shale gas would bring down our energy prices. It has in the US, but she says any shale gas fracked in the UK would have no impact on our heating bills, and wouldn't even be used in this country, because we are locked into European energy prices. "What will reduce prices is a significant investment in renewable energy and energy efficiency. Just exactly as the price of gas is going up, the price of renewables is coming down, and that's why there is such a fierce battle going on in places like the department of energy. I don't think we should be naive about this. There is a massive battle of vested interests going on, because the fossil fuel companies can see the writing on the wall - they can see that quite soon those renewable sources are going to be cheaper, and that is why we've had such a fightback from the nuclear industry, and such a fightback from companies like Cuadrilla, who absolutely don't want to see that."When anyone talks about renewable energy I confess my spirits sag. The government's much-hyped Green Deal has been a disappointment for most homeowners, who did the sums and decided they couldn't afford to make their homes more environmentally friendly after all. I'm one of them, and had got the impression that renewables were proving trickier to develop than hoped. This week it emerged that David Cameron wants to stop any more onshore wind farms being built, and may even pledge to dismantle some in next year's manifesto. Many Tory voters may conclude that if even a government this committed to renewable energy can't make it work, then clearly it's just not possible?"There is just such a cognitive dissonance - I suppose hypocrisy is a better way of putting it - between what the government says, and what it does. What evidence do you have, beyond the rhetoric, that David Cameron is remotely interested in the green agenda? He's got Owen Paterson as his environment secretary, for heavens' sake, who doesn't even think that climate change is a problem! Everyone can look back on David Cameron hugging a husky and see it for the photo opportunity that it was. It was a very clever way of detoxifying the Tory brand at the time. To talk about closing wind farms in this of all weeks, the very week of the IPPC report, I think shows the Tories in their true colours, and just shows that 'Vote blue, get green' meant nothing. The government seems to have an ideological opposition to renewable energy."Even more revealing, Lucas thinks, is the news this week that the government intends to alter the law of trespass, to allow shale gas to be fracked underneath private land even without the owner's permission. "The government obviously feels that it is not going to be able to win the argument, so it's going to take away people's right to decide what happens under their own homes. And this was a government that came to power championing localism!"How does she explain it? "The only answer I have is that the fossil fuel companies have a direct line to government." More than 50 energy company employees have been seconded to the government free of charge, and dozens of them to the department of energy and climate change. "They're not doing that out of the goodness of their hearts. They're doing it because they want to shape the kind of policy that comes out of it - and frankly they're doing a rather good job. I cannot come up with another answer for why government would look evidence in the face and turn its back on it."When the evidence on climate change is as bleak as it looks in the latest IPCC report, Lucas doesn't blame the public for wanting to look away in despair. We've been reading IPCC reports for quarter of a century - and she admits that "essentially it's been the same story for 25 years. Increasingly, we are recognising that the science is not what's going to move this. To me the really interesting thing about climate change right now is less about the science and much more about psychology. I think the green movement has learned the hard way that handing out small print leaflets saying 'If we don't change soon then we're all doomed' is not an effective way of getting people to change. So I think there's a much greater emphasis now within the Green party and the green movement about talking about the positives."Her favourite cartoon shows a lecturer giving a presentation about what a low-emissions society would look like - sustainability, more livable cities, cleaner air, healthier kids etc - and an audience member asking, 'But what if climate change is a big hoax and we create a better world for nothing?' "I'm a great believer in needing things that give us some hope," Lucas smiles. "With a positive vision of the benefits then I think we'll have a much better chance of bringing people with us."She is probably right. But the imperative of positivity makes it hard to know exactly what she thinks. She smiles an awful lot, but would have to be a saint to feel this permanently cheerful in private, so I try to guess how she really feels by timing the pauses that often preface her smiley answers. After four years in parliament, I ask if she feels more or less optimistic that politicians will do what is necessary to combat climate change - and I count more than six seconds of silence before her reply."I suppose I get a sense that we can build coalitions, and that with enough political will, things can change. That's been quite interesting to see up-front." There has been some great collaborative work between her party and the trade unions, she goes on hopefully. But when pressed, it transpires that Ed Miliband has had a grand total of two meetings with Lucas since she was elected - and Cameron has not spoken to her once. She has been staggered by the lack of legislative scrutiny in Westminster, and by the stunning inefficiency of the entire system. "Parliamentary reform has gone right up my list of priorities," she grins. For 12 years before her election to the Commons, Lucas was an MEP, "and I never thought I would say this, but in some respects the European parliament is more efficient than Westminster".She must have had moments when she's questioned the point of her being there at all. "Um . . . No, I haven't thought that, because it's so important that the Greens have a place. We've had much more coverage, it's been an amplifier. And I can take a position that helps shift the other parties. I see my role very much as being there to hold their feet to the fire. It feels important, and that matters. I didn't do this because I thought it was fun," she smiles, "but because I thought it was important."The funny thing is, Lucas reflects, smiling again, that she has been trying for years to work out where the real power lies: "And it always seems to be where I'm not." She didn't find it on Oxfordshire county council in the 90s, nor in Strasbourg, nor now in Westminster. She feels hopeful about her party's prospects in next month's European elections, and urges any supporters worried about wasting their vote in next year's election to remember that if everyone in Brighton had done the same, her party still wouldn't have a single MP. But she also recalls something Miliband said when he was climate change minister. "There he was, the minister - which you would have thought made him influential - appealing for NGOs to organise a campaign that would give him permission to mobilise in government."Does she mean she might well have been more powerful sitting down on the pathway in Balcombe than she can be on the House of Commons benches? Sometimes I wish Lucas would be a bit less cautiously cheerful, and just let rip about what's wrong with our political system. But after a few seconds' pause she says. "No, no, I think the two are complementary."