  Wednesday, December 16, 2015 • 15:24Z  Financial Times (web site) • 284 words 
 European carmakers face climate deal headache  
Joel Lewin
  
  Moody's says that tighter carbon regulations will encourage substitution for less carbon intensive products such as renewable energy, which will further hurt these companies.  It also says that airlines, logistics companies and transport groups will face further restrictions on carbon emissions, warning:  The cost of achieving this efficiency (e.g., by regulating the performance of industrial equipment) could affect energy intensive issuers' credit profiles... potentially weakening their competitive positions  The oil and gas industry is going to suffer to some extent. While explorers and producers will be the most affected, Moddy's says companies involved in refining could actually benefit from the impact of the climate agreement by taking advantage of increased demand for alternative fuels such as biofuel and renewable diesel.  T he climate change agreement  struck in Paris last weekend risks proving a headache for  European carmakers, Moody's says.  European carmakers are likely to face further difficulties, warns Moody's:  In our view, the cost of complying with increasingly tougher emissions standards is significant and, in general, negative for the credit quality of European automotive manufacturers.  In a highly competitive industry already grappling with generally low margins and overcapacity, the probability that these costs can be recovered from a price-sensitive customer base is questionable.  The technical challenge of meeting increasingly demanding fuel efficiency requirements and emission reductions is one of the many risks facing automotive manufacturers over the long term. Indeed, these challenges are clearly reflected in the still evolving case of Volkswagen AG's (A3, negative) emissions crisis.  Unsurprisingly, the credit rating agency also reckons:  Extractive industries, such as coal mining and oil & gas, face significant challenges from more stringent regulation, albeit over an extended period of time.    