 
Tuesday, November 3, 2020

Financial Times • p. 10,11 • 1159 words

Investors electrify South African
banks' sustainability push

Climate change Environmental disclosures have big implications for the financing of the region's fossil fuel projects, writes Joseph Cotterill
Joseph Cotterill

When South Africa's Standard Bank became the country's first company to table a climaterelated shareholder resolution last year, few expected investors to back moves forcing the bank to adopt and disclose policies on loans to new coal mines and power plants in Africa.

The bank is the largest lender to a continent that is both desperate for energy and exposed to climate change. At the same time, the bank's home country relies heavily on coal to generate most of its power.

Garnering 55 per cent support, the vote passed "to everyone's shock, including our own … it was the first time we had done this", says Tracey Davies, executive director of Just Share, a non-profit group that promotes shareholder activism and responsible investing in South Africa.

The vote for a coal lending policy marked a watershed moment, although only 38 per cent of shareholders at the meeting backed wider climate disclosures by the bank.

In the year since, there has been a wave of public commitments by South African banks to incorporate climate risk into lending — a shift with profound implications for access to capital for energy projects in the region.

Recent climate risk resolutions that were tabled by South African banks themselves, including Investec and Nedbank, all had overwhelming votes in favour — "a strong indication that shareholders want banks to provide them with climate disclosures", particularly with regards to the share of loans that have climate risks, according to Ms Davies.

In October, Standard Bank published its own disclosures, which revealed R67bn ($4.2bn), or 4.4 per cent, of the bank's credit exposures were linked to fossil fuels, versus R12bn to renewables.

"There's been a very rapid shift at all of the banks in understanding that this is a serious risk, and that they need to up their game in terms of disclosure. They have all done a lot," says Ms Davies.

This year, Investec became South Africa's first bank to detail a financing policy across all fossil fuels, and Standard Bank is preparing to release a similar policy by early next year.

What looks like sudden change reflects the build-up of quiet, behindthe-scenes shifts over time, says Wendy Dobson, Standard Bank's head of group corporate citizenship. "We have reached a tipping point," she says. South Africa's financial regulators have taken more interest in climate risk in the banking system and institutional investors have added their voice, she says.

Standard Bank's latest climate disclosures allow investors "to get a sense of what kind of risk appetite the bank is taking in these sectors … that allows them to make decisions about what they want to be invested in", says Ms Dobson. The disclosures are also intended as a work in progress, she adds. "We still don't have a definitive approach to definitions and methodologies … This is very much something that is evolving."

The biggest question may be defining how these new policies will relate to Africa's own challenges, with both global temperature rises and the need for its economies to catch up.

Standard Bank's latest disclosures hint at how it believes climate change could ravage African economies and drive banking losses, including a warning that R111bn of agricultural lending is exposed to "elevated physical risk".

At the same time, less than half of Africans have access to grid electricity, and fewer gigawatts have been installed south of the Sahara desert than in Spain.

"We are in a different context in Africa — we are still dealing with fundamental challenges of people having access to power," Ms Dobson says. Standard Bank is being guided by the Paris Agreement, which allows poorer countries more time to make a transition away from fossil fuels, she adds.

None of the South African banks'policies forbid loans to build newafrican coal mines or power stationsoutright, even though coal is generally a small part of their energy portfolios.

Investec — which has less than onefifth of its energy portfolio in coal —"will only finance new coal miningtransactions or the expansion of— ongoing operations if there is a comprehensive socio-economic motivation" that senior leadership hasagreed is valid, according to its newfinancing policy.

"A lot of these policies will exclude South Africa's current plans — but basically say that if the opportunity arose elsewhere in Africa, we would consider it," says Robyn Hugo, director of climate change engagement at Just Share.

In any case, Ms Hugo says, oil and gas are overtaking coal as the next bigarea of contention for banks' climatepolicies in Africa. Natural gas in particular is being classed by banks as a"transition fuel" that can help economic development while producingrelatively fewer greenhouse gasesthan coal.

At stake are some of the biggestcapital projects in the continent.They range from LNG (liquefied natural gas) development in Mozambique, where France's Total recentlyarranged the region's largest debt financing at $15bn, to the world'slongest heated oil pipeline in easternAfrica that would link oilfields inUganda to ports in Tanzania. Standard Bank is lending to both.

South Africa's latest energy planalso signalled a greater role for natural gas to speed the country's transition from ageing coal plants.

Activists argue that many Africancountries will see little energy security benefit from oil pipelines andLNG terminals focused on exports torich nations — and that far from beinga transition fuel, natural gas will become deadweight infrastructureGiven the pace of change in globalemissions targets.

These activists also argue that African bankers should be fleshing out renewables lending policies instead,"as prices for solar, wind and othersources drop and reliability of suchprojects increases. Lenders "are stillrelying on old arguments about fossil "fuel baseload" or favouring coal, oil and gas to supply bedrock demand, Ms Davies says.

Standard Bank's latest climate disclosures ays that renewables "provide great potential for African energy utilities", but it adds that renewables generation in the region is still limited and that hydropower — Africa's biggest renewable — supplies only 16 per cent of the continent's power.

Even after the past year of change, it is unclear whether shareholders in South African banks will continue to thrash out climate issues at annual general meetings. After the breakthrough vote by its shareholders in 2019, Standard Bank did not table climate risk resolutions put to it by Just Share and the Raith Foundation this year. It said its board's decision "not to allow the usurping of its role by stakeholders that do not have any fiduciary responsibilities to the com—pany does not suggest that the board is deviating from its environmentally responsible…path". Despite the wrangling, the terms of the debate have changed and bank shareholders can now compare climate policies across lenders, Ms Davies says. "Certainly, we have come a long way." 