 News, Friday, February 28, 2020 451 mots, p. 2

Central bank chiefs call for business to act faster on climate risk

Cop26
LESLIE HOOK AND MARTIN ARNOLD LONDON

Mark Carney and Christine Lagarde have urged companies, institutions and central banks to speed up climate risk assessment and disclosure, ahead of the Glasgow climate summit in November.

Addressing the heads of several of the UK's largest banks at the Guildhall in London yesterday, Mr Carney, governor of the Bank of England, called on more institutions to join the Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures, an initiative to get companies to calculate their exposure to climate risk and disclose it to investors.

he said. he hoped the standards would rCentral Bank, threw her weight behind calls for companies to provide much fuller disclosure of their exposure to climate change risks.

Ms Lagarde cited the patchy level of information provided by the 26 biggest eurozone banks and insurers as evidence that "we still have some way to go". She added: "Only five out of the 26 partially disclose the impact of their financial assets and none of them provide full disclosure."

The central bank chiefs were speaking at the launch of a finance agenda for the UN climate summit, known as Cop26, in Glasgow.

"The objective for the private finance work of this Cop26 is simple — to ensure that every financial decision takes climate change into account," Mr Carney said. "Every company, every bank, every insurer will have to adjust their business models."

Mr Carney said that working with other regulators who were undertaking climate stress tests would be a top priority, pointing out that 15 jurisdictions other than the UK had committed to doing so.

But the absence of the US — which under President Donald Trump is preparing to withdraw from the Paris climate agreement this autumn — will make global central bank action difficult.

Mr Carney, who is also UN special envoy for climate action and finance and is set to step down from the BoE in March, has made climate change risk a priority and last year launched the bank's first climate stress tests for large banks and institutions.

The Guildhall event highlighted that climate finance, and adapting the financial system to address climate risks, would be a big theme ahead of the Glasgow summit.

Ms Lagarde, who promised to make climate change risk "a mission-critical priority" when she took over as ECB president last year, said: "Central banks need to devote greater attention to understanding the impact of climate change, including its implications for inflation dynamics."

The ECB would publish the results of its debut stress test of climate risks in the 90 most systemically important financial institutions in the eurozone by the end of this year, she said. 