

Financial Times (web site)
Sunday, February 28, 2021 - Z 725 mots

Shareholders push SEC for tougher climate regime for US
oil

Myles McCormick in New York

Activist groups are calling on the US Securities and Exchange Commission to make it easier for shareholders
to   table   climate   resolutions   at   oil   producer   annual   meetings   in   another   early   test   of   the   Biden
administration's efforts to tackle climate change.

During Donald Trump's presidency, campaigners say, the SEC made it easier for companies to throw out
shareholder proposals on spurious grounds rather than put them to investor votes.

"In the last four years, there were a lot of surprising developments and I think it's fair to say that many
shareholders   felt   like   it   was   an   adverse   decision-making   environment   for   shareholder   proposals,"   said
Sanford Lewis, a lawyer and director of the Shareholder Rights Group.

"It was broadly considered a corporate-friendly environment in the last administration."

The number of shareholder resolutions the SEC ruled as inadmissible jumped under the chairmanship of Jay
Clayton, whom Trump appointed in 2017.

Companies were allowed to reject about 15 per cent of environmental and social proposals in 2018, compared
with 9 per cent in 2016, according to Institutional Shareholder Services, an independent investor advisory
group.   That   jump   could   have   been   higher   had   there   not   been   a   surge   in   shareholders   withdrawing
resolutions.

Joe Biden has promised to make tackling climate change a core pillar of his presidency. But a narrow
majority in Congress will leave him depending on regulatory bodies such as the SEC, the Environmental
Protection Agency and the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission to push his agenda.

The SEC is independent from the government but the president appoints its chairman and commissioners,
who determine its direction.

Activists'   biggest   gripe   is   the   broadening   of   the   deﬁnition   of   "micromanagement"   during   Clayton's
chairmanship. Previously this rule allowed companies to reject proposals that delved too deeply into the day-
to-day running of a company, but the expanded deﬁnition meant any proposals that prescribed particular
outcomes could be excluded.

In a letter to the SEC last month, the SRG - alongside fellow investor advocacy groups Ceres, the Forum for
Sustainable and Responsible Investment and the Interfaith Center on Corporate Responsibility - asked the
SEC to repeal the new interpretations "to re-enable shareholders to ask their investee companies to improve
disclosure and performance on climate change".

Shareholder proposals were responsible for sparking a shift in attitude by European oil groups in recent
years, said Mark van Baal, director at Dutch shareholder group Follow This, which has submitted resolutions
calling on oil groups Chevron, ConocoPhillips, Occidental and Phillips 66 to set targets for cutting carbon
emitted by the burning of their products (so-called Scope 3 emissions).

"Oil majors have only promised to reduce product emissions after investors voted for shareholder proposals,"
said van Baal. "We saw this ﬁrst at Shell and then at BP and Equinor."

Gary Gensler, the former Goldman Sachs banker Biden has picked for his SEC chairman, is widely anticipated
to take a tougher line against companies on ESG matters. The number of resolutions rejected through "no-
action" letters from the SEC will probably drop, analysts said.

"The interpretations of the grounds for admission under the 'no-action' process tend to go in waves, up and
down, depending on what administration is in place and the chair of the SEC," said Patrick McGurn, head of
strategic research and analysis at ISS.

 





With Gensler yet to be conﬁrmed to the position, any change in policy will take time, and will probably be too
late for the 2021 AGM season. Still, analysts said John Coates, a Harvard academic who has been installed as
acting head of the commission's corporate ﬁnance division, could already be exerting some inﬂuence.


In a promising sign for campaigners, the SEC on Friday denied ExxonMobil's request to block a shareholder
proposal   asking   the   company   to   report   how   its   political   lobbying   activities   align   with   climate change
concerns. The proposal was ﬁled by France's BNP Paribas Asset Management, which in 2020 ﬁled a similar
petition about climate change and lobbying at Chevron. The Chevron proposal won majority support from
investors, including asset management giant BlackRock.

"Insufﬁcient information is available to evaluate how ExxonMobil ensures that its lobbying activities, directly,
in the company's name, and indirectly, through trade associations, align with the Paris Agreement's goals,
and how misalignments are addressed," BNP said.

The SEC did not respond to a request for comment.

Additional reporting by Patrick Temple-West in New York



 


