

The New York Times (web site)
Tuesday, February 23, 2021 -  626 mots

Biden’s Climate Envoy, at U.N., Likens Global Inaction to a
‘Suicide Pact’

By Somini Sengupta

John Kerry’s remarks stood in sharp contrast to the American stance under the previous administration,
which tried to block even general mentions of global warming at the world body.

The United States climate envoy, John Kerry, on Tuesday warned that global warming was making the world
a more dangerous place and posed risks to peace and security around the world.

Failing to address the threats of climate change is “marching forward to what is almost tantamount to a
mutual   suicide   pact,”   Mr.   Kerry   said   in   a   session   of   the   United   Nations   Security   Council   attended   by
presidents and prime ministers from several countries.

“We bury our heads in the sand at our own peril,” he went on. “It’s urgent to treat the climate crisis as the
urgent security threat that it is.”

Climate change has been coming up in the Security Council for more than a decade, but the Tuesday
meeting   was   notable   for   its   stark   contrast   to   the   last   four   years,   when   the   United   States,   under   the
presidency of Donald J. Trump, sought to block even general mentions of climate science in United Nations
proceedings.

“Climate   disruption   is   a   crisis   ampliﬁer   and   multiplier,”   the   United   Nations   secretary   general,   António
Guterres, told the Council.

Mr. Kerry noted the “inexcusable absence” of United States leadership on climate in the previous four years.
As president, Mr. Trump pulled the United States out of the Paris Agreement, the global accord designed to
limit emissions of greenhouse gases. President Biden began the process of rejoining as soon as he was
sworn in.

The Security Council has the power to impose sanctions and authorize peacekeeping missions to countries,
which is why countries argue about what it should and should not address.

Mr. Kerry’s remarks were part of a diplomatic squabble that broke out among powerful countries over
whether climate change should even be discussed in the world body, which was designed to tackle war and
peace.

Russia, India and China — all among the world’s biggest producers of greenhouse gas emissions — argued
that climate change could be addressed in other ways. New global fault lines began to emerge.

India’s environment minister, Prakash Javdekar, dismissed the idea of climate change as a driver of conﬂict.
China’s climate envoy, Xie Zhenhua, framed climate change as a development issue. Russia’s ambassador to
the United Nations, Vassily A. Nebenzia, waxed philosophical about rising temperatures. “Are they really the
root causes of these conﬂicts?” he asked.

The session led to nothing concrete. But the fact that it happened at all, and that several presidents and
prime ministers participated, sent a signal that climate change is becoming increasingly important among
United Nations member states, particularly with the United States taking it on. “The Biden team’s emphasis
on global warming has changed the incentive structure in the Council, and I think a lot of states are going to
be ﬂagging the issue this year,” said Richard Gowan, an analyst at the International Crisis Group.

Of the 21 countries where the United Nations currently deploys peacekeepers, 10 are ranked as most exposed
to climate change,   according   to   the   Stockholm   International   Peace   Research   Institute,   an   independent
research group.



Prime Minister Boris Johnson of Britain, whose country serves as the rotating chair of the Security Council
this month, opened the session by saying, “I know that there are people around the world who will say that

 



this is all kind of green stuff from a bunch of tree-hugging tofu-munchers and not suited to international
diplomacy and international politics.” He added: “I couldn’t disagree more profoundly.”


Britain hosts the next United Nations climate negotiations, to be held in November in Glasgow.



