

The New York Times (web site)
Wednesday, March 31, 2021 -  387 mots

A crucial question looms as the White House unveils its
climate plan: Which areas can be saved?

By Christopher Flavelle

President Biden’s $2 trillion infrastructure plan represents an enormous effort to protect Americans from
climate change, but it sidesteps one of the most immediate and wrenching dilemmas: Deciding not just
where to spend more money on roads, bridges or sea walls, but where to stop spending — and instead, help
people get out of the way.

The need to make difﬁcult decisions like these reﬂects the growing consensus among experts that not every
community in the United States can be protected in the long run. Some areas — particularly in some coastal
zones, but also inland along rivers and other areas where ﬂooding is worsening with climate change — can’t
successfully be defended no matter how much money the government might be willing to throw into
fortiﬁcations, drainage upgrades or other improvements.

Deciding which areas should be abandoned, and when, is one of the most urgent and difﬁcult challenges
facing the United States. The decision is deeply emotional, because it involves uprooting lives and destroying
communities. The ﬁnancial consequences are also sweeping, since property values are likely to plummet,
along with the life savings of people who live there.

As   a   result,   ﬁguring   out   how   to   plan   for   retreat   is   among   the   hardest   decisions   facing   policymakers,
according to people who have worked on climate resilience.

“It’s an enormous challenge — the politics are very difﬁcult,” said Alice Hill, who planned for managing
climate effects at the National Security Council during the Obama administration. At that point, she said, the
government wasn’t ready to tell people in vulnerable towns and cities, “You really want that bridge and
you’re not going to get it, because your community’s going to be washed away.”

But as disasters become more devastating and frequent, Ms. Hill added, that conversation can no longer be
avoided. “It’s deﬁnitely time,” she said.

The scale of the challenge is enormous, with as much as half a trillion dollars of coastal real estate expected
to be underwater by the end of the century.

The idea is that communities facing insurmountable risks can either retreat from the most threatened areas
in an organized way, before disaster strikes, or afterward. But either way, retreat in some places will be
necessary.




 


