 Features, Saturday, October 31, 2020 543 mots, p. 14,15

Saturday

GROWING CONCERNS

A new film about tackling climate change takes a feelgood approach to the issue. By Tabi Jackson Gee

Whisper it, but a small shift is happening in the conversation around climate change. Perhaps it's born from desperation, but messages of hope are trickling through - even from unlikely sources like Woody Harrelson, the Hollywood actor and narrator of a Netflix documentary called Kiss the Ground. In it, scientists and celebrity activists unpack the ways in which soil may be the key to combating climate change and saving the planet.

In the feature-length film directed by Josh and Rebecca Tickell, the affable

Harrelson is joined by a slew of celebrities such as Patricia Arquette and Ian Somerhalder. Based on a book and campaign of the same name, Kiss the Ground wants to get farmers and growers to stop using chemicals on their fields and to help repair topsoil degradation - a threat to food security, water health and myriad other problems.

As the film charts the history of modern agriculture, it unveils a different, utopian vision to what we're used to hearing. If we learn to look after soil, it will look after us.

While persuasive computer modelling from Nasa shows how tilling soil leads to huge rises in CO2, Zimbabwean ecologist and livestock farmer Allan Savory demonstrates how growing cover crops can immediately help reduce temperatures on the ground. Other experts include soil health pio neers Ray Archuleta, Gabe Brown and Detroit Dirt's Pashon Murray.

There is nothing quite like listening to Harrelson's Texan drawl as he ponders the challenges of our time, and the salvational power of dirt. And have no doubt, this is a typical Hollywood movie; there are the goodies (concerned celebrities) the downtrodden underdog (the planet) and the baddy - a Nazi who invented tear gas and is blamed for bringing pesticides to the US.

During a brief cameo, model Gisele Bündchen tells us "our health and the health of our planet are connected" - thanks Gisele - but for all the glamour, the film has just enough of a message to make us think twice about that mucky stuff under our feet.

On a small scale, in our own gardens, while we often discuss the best com posts or plants for different pH levels, practices like "no dig" gardening are only just becoming mainstream. Yet soil health is essential to the success of every space we put plants into.

In scientific terms, it's very basic stuff, but perhaps this sort of straightforward clarity is what we need.

I'm sure many in agriculture will question how much of this information is new. And the film does put a big emphasis on the responsibility of farmers. But it also offers a glimpse of hope, and "the science" is presented in a digestible way that engages rather than intimidates.

With an overwhelming focus on food provenance, it's the same message that has been supporting organic farming for decades. But in this case the mes sage is supported on a larger level by showing the scale of the planet's own intelligence and the relative naivety of human beings. And that's something we can probably all agree on. 