 Wednesday, March 18, 2009 733 mots

The five fighters of climate change
Ed Crooks, energy editor

From a solar-powered cardboard cooker for Africa to a giant industrial microwave that locks underground carbon sucked from the atmosphere by vegetation, innovation and ingenuity still offer hope that it is not too late to tackle climate change.

That at least is the encouragement offered by the five varied finalists in the FT Climate Change Challenge.

The competition, organised by Forum for the Future, the not-for-profit sustainable development group, and backed by Hewlett-Packard, the information technology company, aims is to raise the profile of innovations that can be both commercially successful and bring about material reductions in greenhouse gas emissions.

Financial Times readers, having been invited to nominate entries over the past few months, now have the chance to vote online for the winner, who will receive a prize of $75,000.

The credit crunch and economic downturn have undoubtedly dealt a blow to investment in environmental technologies such as renewable energy, with smaller companies often the hardest hit. At the same time, however, "green stimulus" plans in the US, the European Union and elsewhere point to a political resolve to tackling climate change. The downturn, many now say, offers opportunities to restructure economies and put them on a path to lower carbon dioxide emissions.

As Peter Madden, chief executive of Forum for the Future, puts it: "It is clearly more difficult to raise money now, but a lot of the ideas we have been looking at are going to save money as well as greenhouse gas emissions.

"There are things we can do that will both help us get through the recession and change industry structures to put in place the low-carbon economy that we need to create if we are to avert the threat of climate change."

Against that background, the outlook for our five finalists is challenging, certainly, but not discouraging. Nearly 300 entries were submitted. A few were grandiose, large-scale projects, but the majority were highly practical ideas that have realistic hopes of being converted into successful commercial applications relatively quickly.

Alas, many highly promising ideas did not make the final shortlist: among them, a proposal to use mobile telephone texts to arrange shared taxi rides in London, and an idea for solar-powered internet centres for Africa.

The five chosen were the ones that seemed to offer the greatest potential for growth in the eyes of the panel of judges: entrepreneur Sir Richard Branson; Eileen Claussen, president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change; Mark Hurd, chairman and chief executive of HP; Sir Terry Leahy, chief executive of Tesco; Rajendra Pachauri, chairman of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; Leon Sandler, executive director of the Deshpande Center for technological innovation at MIT; Jonathon Porritt, founder of Forum for the Future; and Lionel Barber, editor of the FT.

The finalists are:

Carbonscape

A New Zealand company that has developed a machine to turn biomass such as agricultural waste into carbon-rich material, locking up the carbon that would otherwise enter the atmosphere as carbon dioxide. The material, known as biochar, could also be used as fertiliser or fuel.

Mr Barber commented: "Carbonscape has the potential to be an efficient and effective solution to the problem of rising greenhouse gas levels. Its feasibility has been proven and it could have a truly global impact."

ADEF

A US company founded by a former truck salesman, which has a $50 wheel cover for heavy trucks called the Deflektor. It is estimated to reduce fuel consumption by 2 per cent, giving a very quick return on the investment.

Sir Richard commented: "I cannot see a world without trucks. This simple idea could make a huge difference."

Kyoto Energy

A Kenyan company selling $5 solar cookers made of cardboard and acrylic. The cookers, which have recently gone into production in Nairobi, fight both deforestation in Africa and the health problems caused by cooking on wood fires.

Sir Terry said: "As well as reducing carbon emissions and deforestation, this cheap and simple idea could save people in developing countries time and money."

Neem Biotech

A British company producing a feed additive called Mootral, to be fed to cows and sheep to reduce their flatulence. Farm animals make a significant contribution to greenhouse gas emissions and are attracting increasing interest from policymakers.

Sir Terry praised "a novel idea with the potential to have a real impact inreducing carbon emissions from the food chain". Sir Richard was also impressed: "Can they stop cows farting and save the planet?"

Loughborough University

British academics have designed ceiling tiles that can cool rooms, to be used alongside or instead of conventional air-conditioning systems.

Air conditioning accounts for a significant proportion of electricity use, particularly in the US, and is growing rapidly in the developing world: reducing its demand for power could make a real difference to energy consumption.

Ms Claussen said: "This design will be well received by investors in the heating and ventilation industry."

On FT.com, you can read more about the companies and the competition, and vote for your favourite idea. While the contest organisers hope all five entries will prosper, the key criteria is to identify the idea that most deserves to grow, but needs the extra push that the publicity of winning would give it - the one, perhaps, you would choose to invest your own money in. Voting closes on April 1 and the results will be announced in the FT on April 3.
