 FT REPORT - FUND MANAGEMENT, Monday, October 19, 2009 350 mots, p. 14

Climate change opportunities catching on
By Sophia Grene

"This is real, hard-core, capitalism. This is the biggest investment trend of all time." Kevin Parker, global head of Deutsche Bank's asset management division is talking about climate change.

For the past four years, Mr Parker has been evangelising among both his own fund managers and the broader investment community about climate change. The burden of his message is that climate change is real and therefore a source of both investment risk and opportunity.

"We've built a $100 trillion economy based on fossil fuels - now all of the assumptions that's based on are being destroyed," he says. "If you really believe we will move to a low carbon economy, there's going to have to be tectonic shifts in the markets."

To some extent, he thinks, an understanding of climate change's impact on companies is already feeding through into stock prices. "The stock market tends to discount factors far earlier than the public. What the market is beginning to tell us is that the externality of carbon emissions will be priced."

Companies that emit high levels of carbon will have to pay for the damage they do to the environment, so investors are not prepared to pay as high prices for them as their low carbon peers. "It's not widespread, it's not a rush for the door, but there is a recognition," he claims.

Despite this belief in the efficiency of markets, Mr Parker has yet to convince most of his own fund managers that climate change should be part of their thinking. An internal product - "Carbon Beta" - that attempts to show how levels of carbon emission relate to stock valuations has been created in an attempt to prove to the Deutsche Bank investment managers they can find an informational advantage by focusing on the issue.

"Most of our managers are not convinced yet. Investment managers are paid to be sceptical, so they put up a big hurdle for the research guys to prove there was alpha there. Now a healthy debate will ensue."

While the Deutsche fund managers argue over whether using information about a company's environmental impact can help make better investment decisions, Mr Parker's campaign to bring the problem to the attention of the world is doing slightly better.

Since the summer, a huge screen showing the number of metric tons of carbon in the earth's atmosphere has been displayed outside Madison Square Garden in New York.

The Carbon Counter , sponsored by Deutsche Bank, is Mr Parker's pet project. With some pride, he counts up the number of cities that want to use a version of it - 14 at latest count. He may still be struggling to convince his fund managers, but the PR campaign is a hit.
