 FT REPORT - FUND MANAGEMENT, Monday, November 30, 2009 446 mots, p. 1

Move to see climate issue go main line
By Pauline Skypala

News analysisRailpen is quizzing its advisers on their approach to climate change, writes Pauline Skypala

One of the UK's biggest pension funds will today seek to make climate change a key issue for its advisers and the 40 investment managers mandated to run money for the fund.

Railpen, the £17bn (€18.7bn, $29bn) fund for railway employees, will be sending out detailed questionnaires to probe the extent to which managers take climate change seriously, how it affects their investment process, and what they see as their fiduciary duty.

Devised in collaboration with HSBC and Linklaters, the 77 questions will be freely available to any other asset owner that wants to quiz its advisers and managers.

Frank Curtiss, head of corporate governance at Railpen Investments, said the initiative was not the first in this area but was "the most sophisticated", particularly on the legal issues. "We have to be comfortable our advisers and managers are taking on these risks so we need to open up a dialogue."

He said there had been a strong focus on short-term returns and a view that researching environmental, social and governance issues was a niche area.

Gordon Morrison, global head of equity trading analytics at HSBC, said the real point of the effort was to ensure returns for asset owners do not disappear. "We need to make a huge transition to a low carbon economy in a short time. We have a big pool of existing assets that is not necessarily structured for a low carbon economy."

Mr Morrison pointed to regulatory moves elsewhere, notably in the US, where insurers will be required to submit annual climate risk reports from May 2010. There is no parallel in Europe. This may change if asset owners signal they see this sort of reporting as a starting point to deal with the issue.

There are a number of industry-led initiatives. Insurers have set up ClimateWise, an international group that commits to action on climate change against six principles. Launched by Prince Charles in 2007, the group last week published its second independent review.

European asset managers and owners can join the Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change, which encourages a proactive approach to climate change among its members and disclosure by companies. Railpen is not a member because it felt the £5,000 annual fee was too much of its members' money to commit.

With the latest initiative, which involved a time commitment rather than cash, Railpen hopes to act as a catalyst. "The investment community needs to become substantially more sophisticated and more engaged. Tools like this will help," said Mr Curtiss.

One area where he hopes to move the debate forward is the legal issue of fiduciary duty. "People hide behind fiduciary duty as an excuse to do nothing," he said.

The legal requirement on asset owners to act prudently and in the best interests of beneficiaries is narrowly interpreted by some as a duty to maximise return. "Duties have been understood in a particular way by the investment industry," said Vanessa Havard-Williams, partner at Linklaters.

She said the legal obligation had to be considered in the overall regulatory and scientific context. "It does not exist in isolation."

Regulation could fill some of the gap, but was not yet in place, she added. "The science is there but the regulation is not. So you have an exposure but it is not signalled to you."
