  Thursday, December 17, 2009  Financial Times • London Ed1 • p. 14 • 332 words  

Leaders must now agree climate deal  Today some 115 heads of government will descend on the Danish capital to try to agree on a global climate deal. They must succeed even if just to set out broad political principles. If there was ever a time for statesmanship, it is surely now. A lack of action would be shameful not just because of the risks climate change brings, but because an agreement could be to everyone's benefit.  Yet a deal is looking less likely by the day. The greatest stumbling block has turned out to be the question of financial assistance. Developing countries have been making increasingly strident calls for money on the table on the basis that they need help to adapt to a low-carbon economy and that they did not cause the problem.  These arguments have merit. But threatening to scupper a climate deal on the question of government-to-government aid is making red lines out of red herrings.  It is politically impossible for rich country governments to write cheques for any significant amount of money with their finances in as parlous a state as they are today especially in the US, which has turned its back on a global climate agreement before. If anything is finally contributed, it will probably be sluiced away from existing aid budgets, diminishing the net increase in transfers. The greater danger is that rich-country  voters and parliaments may reject a global deal altogether.  This is exasperating, since a vastly superior solution is available. If a global system for tradeable carbon emissions permits is agreed, poor countries with low emissions stand to make much more than they can ever hope for in government-to-government aid.  If caps along the lines of current proposals are agreed, the market value of global CO2 emissions could easily top half a trillion dollars yearly in the next decade, perhaps much more as caps tighten and prices rise. As long as poor countries receive generous quotas which they can sell to rich-country companies in this global market, they will draw from a larger pot of money to less political resistance than there is to public financing.  By clamouring for public money instead of quotas in a global market, poor countries are shooting themselves in the foot egged on by China which, even if it cannot expect to receive financing, fancies itself a leader of the poor world.  True global leadership is different. Cap and trade can only work with verifiable, legally binding caps. By not signing up to binding targets, China does a disservice to the countries it affects to lead.     