 Foreign, Monday, September 21, 2009 952 mots, p. A 4

Europeans Say U.S. Lacks Will On Climate
By JOHN M. BRODER and JAMES KANTER; John M. Broder reported from Washington, and James Kanter from Brussels.

WASHINGTON - As world leaders gather in New York for the highest-level conference yet on climate change, European leaders are expressing growing unease about the United States' stance in international talks aimed at reaching a global agreement in Copenhagen in December.

Officials of several European countries have cited what they see as a lack of political will on the part of the United States to adequately address climate change. The American reluctance to accept any agreement that would require legally binding and internationally enforceable targets for reductions in greenhouse gas emissions could doom the Copenhagen session, they said.

Ahead of this week's climate talks at the United Nations, the Europeans also expressed little hope that the United States Senate would act on a climate bill before the Copenhagen talks begin. They said the lack of domestic consensus sows doubt about whether the United States can keep any pledges it makes at Copenhagen, either on the level of reductions in global warming emissions or on financial commitments to help developing nations adapt to a changing climate.

Inaction in the Senate also limits the flexibility of America's chief climate negotiator, Todd Stern.

The Obama administration is trying to satisfy European demands for firm targets and timetables, while reassuring a wary Senate that it is not signing on to a system that would impose steep economic costs on the United States that are not shared by developing countries like China and India.

Although the administration and its allies in Congress say they are deeply committed to meaningful action on climate change, they do not want to repeat the experience of Kyoto, Japan, in 1997, when the Clinton administration signed an international agreement that was repudiated by the Senate because it made few demands on the developing world. The United States never ratified the agreement, called the Kyoto Protocol.

John Ashton, the British foreign secretary's special representative for climate change, said several large gaps need to be closed among the major industrialized countries before there could be any hope of success in Copenhagen.

Chief among them, he said, is the "ambition gap" between the United States and the nations of the European Union. While the United States discusses the broad outlines of climate policy, the Europeans have already pledged to cut their emissions by 20 percent by 2020, and more deeply if there is an international agreement.

The Europeans say a bill passed by the House in June showed American goodwill but still fell short of the European target and what scientists say is necessary to limit global temperature increases to 2 degrees Celsius over the planet's temperature early in the Industrial Revolution, which means limiting future changes to about 2 degrees Fahrenheit above current temperatures. This limit is the internationally accepted goal.

The Senate has yet to act, but its targets are likely to be less ambitious.

Mr. Ashton said that the path forward is clear, but that politics are hampering movement in the United States and several other large countries. "There is no technological obstacle. There is no macroeconomic obstacle," said Mr. Ashton, in Washington late last week for a meeting of major industrial countries on climate change. "The barriers are political."

John Bruton, the European Commission ambassador to the United States, was less diplomatic in a statement on Thursday.

"The United States is just one of the 190 countries coming to this conference," Mr. Bruton said, referring to the Copenhagen meeting in December. "But the United States emits 25 percent of all the greenhouse gases that the conference is trying to reduce. Is the U.S. Senate really expecting all the other countries to make a serious effort on climate change at the Copenhagen conference in the absence of a clear commitment from the United States?"

Mr. Stern sharply denied an "ambitions gap" with the Europeans, but he acknowledged that his bargaining position was limited by what the Senate was willing to accept. He said he would not repeat the mistakes of Kyoto.

"The Europeans have a particularly warm affection for Kyoto, but we don't," Mr. Stern said. "It has been my view from the beginning that unlike what happened in Kyoto we need to have our international and domestic postures in sync, so there is domestic and political support for whatever it is we do. We don't want the cart before the horse this time."

Mr. Stern added that the Senate was embroiled in a difficult debate on health care and that the administration was moving ahead on its own on a number of climate-related policies, including major new auto efficiency standards.

"It may be that some people on the other side of the pond don't understand the system that well," Mr. Stern said with a note of exasperation, "but that's -- that is the way our system works, and we're pushing ahead."

Fundamentally dividing the United States and the European Union are questions on how any global climate agreement would be monitored and enforced. The Europeans are committed to a system, similar to that in the Kyoto agreement, under which nations set numerical targets and timetables for emissions reductions, bound together in a global trading scheme and enforced by the United Nations climate change directorate.

The United States instead is now exploring a "pledge and review" system, under which individual nations would set their own targets that are, in the jargon, "measurable, reportable and verifiable" but enforced by domestic -- not international -- law.

Even as Europeans publicly press the United States to produce firm commitments, they also do not want to be blamed for undermining chances of an agreement by taking an unrealistic stance with the United States.

In recent days, some leaders signaled they could soften their demands.

Nicolas Sarkozy, the French president, said that he "could imagine other ways of binding" nations to their pledges besides a full-blown treaty.

Stavros Dimas, the European Union commissioner for the environment, said he was prepared to use an alternative form of agreement to the Kyoto accord to give the United States the broadest opportunity to join a new agreement in Copenhagen.

"In the United States, you know, Kyoto is a dirty word," Mr. Dimas said in an interview on Friday.

Mr. Dimas said those alternatives included amending the Kyoto Protocol, abolishing it or adopting new treaties or protocols tailored to suit different countries.

Mr. Stern said that Australia and South Korea have put forward proposals in recent days that could narrow the gaps between the United States and Europe and also between the industrialized and the developing nations.

The Australian plan sets out a schedule of commitments by all nations to reduce their emissions below a certain baseline level and regularly report progress toward those goals. The South Koreans proposed a registry that would provide a blueprint against which developing countries could track their reductions against a business-as-usual scenario.

All countries, Mr. Stern said, are taking steps now to reduce their emissions.

"It is clearly the case that countries, including the developing countries, are doing a lot at home," he said. "The question is how to capture that in an international agreement."
