

Monday, December 14, 2015

Financial Times • London Ed1 • p. 1 • 372 words

Climate agreement obstacles rise
as oil and coal groups play down
impact

By Pilita Clark in Paris and Demetri Sevastopulo in Washington



The obstacles facing this weekend's global climate change accord were thrown into relief last night when businesses and government officials played down its impact and US Republicans underlined their opposition.

The Paris agreement, which requires all countries to publish plans to deal with global warming, was hailed by international leaders as a turning point after more than 20 years of effort to make this century the last to be powered by fossil fuels.

Angela Merkel, German chancellor, said the deal was "the first time that the entire world community has obligated itself to act in the battle against global climate change", while Pope Francis cautioned it would need "concerted effort and generous dedication". It was adopted by nearly 200 nations.

But coal and oil industry executives shrugged off any suggestion that the new agreement sealed on Saturday night would have any immediate impact on their businesses. The goals include driving down carbon dioxide emissions from fossil fuels as soon as possible to limit global warming to "well below" 2C from pre-industrial times and perhaps as little as 1.5C, a target requiring much deeper emissions cuts than most countries are planning.

Amber Rudd, the UK energy and climate change secretary, described the 1.5C goal as merely "aspirational" while defending the government's decision last month to scrap £1bn in funding for carbon capture systems that could hold down emissions.

Benjamin Sporton, head of the World Coal Association, did not see the new agreement spurring a "massive change at the moment" for companies that produce coal because many developing nations planned to keep burning it.

The American Petroleum Institute said it was still reviewing the accord, but Amjad Bseisu, chief executive of EnQuest, a UK oil explorer, said that the oil industry had more immediate concerns beyond the Paris agreement.

"We already look at our carbon costs, but right now the industry has other challenges [with the falling oil price]."

In the US, Mitch McConnell, the Republican Senate majority leader, said that the US portion of the deal relied on measures being challenged in court.


