
Monday, December 14, 2015

Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 2 • 576 words

Big polluters see no short-term
change

CLIMATE TALKS

By Michael Stothard in Paris and Kiran Stacey in London

The international accord to limit greenhouse gas emissions signed in Paris over the weekend is unlikely to change -economic choices for big polluting industries in the short term, many executives say.

Oil industry officials told the Financial Times the deal would not affect their immediate investment choices, already shaped by national environmental legislation.

A senior executive at one European utility company with coal assets, who did not want to be named because it was not "in vogue" to bash the deal, said: "We are not too worried to be honest, it does not change much right now."

Keith Anderson, chief corporate officer at Scottish Power, one of the UK's biggest energy suppliers, welcomed the deal but said that to make a real difference we "need a stronger pan-European price for carbon".

Business has been pushing for a global carbon price to be part of the agreement in Paris, but in the end such a price was only given an oblique mention as one way nations can help meet emission targets.

Over time the agreement to keep global temperature rises "well below 2C" and make the world economy carbon neutral in the second half of the century should lead to growing pressure on heavy-emitting industries. But this is to an extent hypothetical, at least at present, since the deal relies on voluntary national commitments.

"The immediate implications for business have not changed over the weekend," said Jonathan Grant, a director in PwC's climate change team. "The sharp end of the agreement is in the national plans."

Some figures have predicted huge changes ahead. Lord Browne, the former chief executive of BP, said last year that energy groups faced an " existential " challenge from climate change and the expected energy transition away from fossil fuels.

Coal companies have increasingly been the target of divestment campaigns, with the French government cutting state support this year. Groups such as French oil and gas group Total have been diversifying into renewable energy.

Ali al-Naimi, the oil minister of Saudi Arabia, the world's largest crude exporter, said earlier this year that with the world changing its energy mix, the country could phase out the use of fossil fuels by 2050. He told a conference hall in Paris that the kingdom planned to become a "global power in solar and wind energy" instead.

Many business leaders over the weekend said that the biggest impact of the climate deal would be less about discouraging fossil fuels than encouraging investors to support low carbon technologies.

"The global market for low carbon goods and services is already worth $5.5tn a year and this deal will turbocharge the amount of capital chasing new low carbon investment opportunities," said Abyd Karmali, managing director for climate finance at Bank of America Merrill Lynch.

Stephanie Pfeifer, chief executive of a European network of institutional investors with €13tn in assets, said: "This agreement provides an unequivocal signal for investors to help escalate the development of low carbon infrastructure."

John Kerry, US secretary of state, said that the agreement was "sending a critical message to the global market place", adding that only by mobilising trillions in investment could emissions be reduced.

Alongside the Paris agreement other initiatives were launched to try to shift capital towards renewable sources. India and France, for example, launched a global alliance to mobilise $1tn worth of investment towards developing solar power around the world. 