The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, November 7, 2015, p. 23ExxonMobil on the rack over climate claimsUS prosecutors demand decades of documents as oil company is accused of covering up what it knewAmbrose Evans-PritchardNEW YORK prosecutors have subpoenaed emails and company documents from ExxonMobil in a test case over alleged climate crimes, the most dramatic step yet in an escalating legal assault on the fossil fuel industry.The state is investigating whether the $360 billion US petroleum group, the world's biggest traded oil company and the parent of Esso, withheld information from investors on the financial risks of climate change and conspired to manipulate the public debate.It has demanded documents going back 40 years, when Exxon's own scientists first warned that C02 emissions were likely to drive up temperatures and "destroy" agriculture in vulnerable regions of the world.Exxon officials said they had received the subpoena on Wednesday from the New York attorney-general, Eric Schneiderman, a Left-leaning crusader with a taste for quixotic cases. "We unequivocally reject allegations that ExxonMobil suppressed climate change research," said the company's spokesman Scott Silvestri.Exxon said it had worked closely with the US energy department and the UN climate panel (IPCC) over the years, and accused hostile elements in the media of cherry-picking snippets from old documents to paint a false picture.The probe has been running discreetly for months but has clearly shifted to a higher gear after Inside Climate News revealed in September that Exxon had developed a "brain trust" in the early 1980s to evaluate the dire implications of climate change for the company, only to switch tack later and lobby hard to head off curbs on C02 emissions.Bernie Sanders, the Democratic presidential candidate, has called on the US Justice Department to launch a probe into possible "corporate fraud" by the company."ExxonMobil knew the truth about fossil fuels and climate change and lied to protect their business model at the expense of the planet," he said, comparing it to efforts by tobacco companies to cover up the health risk of smoking. He invoked the nuclear option of the Racketeer Influenced and Corrupt Organisations Act (RICO) used against the Mafia. Twenty top scientists have demanded a full RICO probe of the fossil industry for allegedly plotting to "forestall America's response to climate change".The New York state investigation is retroactive. Exxon has not been in the denial camp for several years. The company includes warnings about climate risk in shareholder reports and regulatory filings.Rex Tillerson, the chief executive, supports a carbon tax and has endorsed action to curb emissions - although this reporter heard him accuse the Obama administration of straying from "sound science" this April at an energy conference in Texas.Clearly, the trail of past actions haunts the company. The Royal Society accused Exxon Mobil as recently as 2006 of propagating an "inaccurate and misleading view of climate science".Green activists say the company bankrolled efforts to sow doubt about the risks of greenhouse gases through the 1990s, leading the Global Climate Coalition and working through think tanks opposed to emission limits.This is a grey area since there are legitimate reasons for questioning the exact relationship between C02 levels and global temperature, and whether warming is the result of human action. But the company may be vulnerable if internal records show a pattern of cynical deception.Oil, gas, and coal companies are already facing massive pressure from a worldwide divestment movement, ranging from the Norwegian pension fund to Cambridge University. They risk being left with trillions of pounds of "stranded assets" if world leaders clinch a far-reaching climate deal at the COP21 summit in Paris next month.The International Energy Agency warns that the two thirds of fossil fuel reserves booked by energy companies can never be burned if the world is to cap the rise in temperatures to 2 degrees C above pre-industrial levels by 2100, deemed the safe limit by climate scientists.The Exxon case is in some respects troubling. Judicial authorities must be careful not to vilify energy companies and encourage a witch hunt.Defenders of the fossil fuel industry protest that oil, gas, and coal have powered the world's industrial revolutions, lifted billions out of poverty, and made the affluent society possible.Yet however unfair it may be, the ExxonMobil investigation will surely not be the last.