 GLOBAL FINANCIAL CRISIS, Friday, October 17, 2008 523 mots, p. 2

French footwork keeps climate plans on track
By Joshua Chaffin in Brussels and Ed Crooks and Fiona Harvey in London

Nicolas Sarkozy, the French president, used some smart diplomatic footwork yesterday to quell a rebellion by eight European Union countries that had threatened to stall the bloc's effort to agree on a wide range of -climate reforms by the end of the year.

The key question now is whether the EU can assuage enough of its member states' concerns, while keeping its goals intact. For each group that receives special consideration, others are bound to demand similar treatment.

"The problem is that it's like opening a Pandora's box," one Commission official said, predicting a frantic period of bargaining in the weeks ahead.

Reaching an agreement is important not only to France's EU presidency but also to the EU itself, which has staked much of its political credibility on its ability to lead the world in environmental policy. Time is of the essence, with an international conference scheduled next year to negotiate a successor to the Kyoto treaty.

Poland looms as one of the biggest obstacles, because it is almost entirely reliant on coal for its electricity. The country has complained that the next phase of Europe's emissions trading scheme - in which utilities would be forced to buy carbon allowances at auction, beginning in 2013 - would result in enormous cost increases.

Along with other east European countries, it complained that poorer EU countries were being forced to shoulder an unfair share of the emissions burden.

"There are a number of legitimate concerns for the new member states that have not been sufficiently taken into account," said Christian Egenhofer, an energy specialist at the Centre for European Policy Studies. Mr Egenhofer suggested that there might be ways to appease Poland by giving its power companies more free allowances or a longer phase-in period to comply fully with auctions.

Another possibility might be to steer a bigger share of the annual projected auction revenue - some €50bn ($67bn, £39bn) or more, depending on the price of carbon - to Polish energy projects. Poland is not the only party angling for adjustments. Italy has been among the most vociferous in arguing for a reassessment of the EU's climate change strategy.

Umberto Quadrino, the chief executive of Edison, Italy's second biggest electricity company, told the Financial Times yesterday that the EU's targets were "simply not achievable" with existing technology.

Some of the loudest complaints have come from industry, where executives question why they will have to meet emissions targets when competitors in the US, India and China have yet to make similar commitments.

European industrialists wield the threat of "carbon leakage", warning that they will be forced to move production outside Europe unless they receive help.

"We play in a global market," said Russel Mills, director of energy and climate policy at chemical group Dow Europe. "If you look at our industry, we would be subject to massive carbon leakage if a transitional approach isn't found." Dow and other companies have proposed that they receive their emissions allowances free but also agree to benchmarks for reductions.

There are signs that industrial concerns are winning some sympathy. French officials floated a proposal that would extend the deadline by three years to meet new emissions standards.

Opponents of such concessions note that the cost of fighting global warming will only increase the longer it is delayed. Some argue that the economic downturn, cited by industrialists as a reason for loosening EU targets, could in fact ease the cost of compliance because reduced industrial activity will limit greenhouse gas emissions.

That could leave cement and steelmakers, for example, with more emissions permits, reducing the impact of the trading scheme.

As they try to shepherd though a deal, French officials have pledged to examine each case independently. They will have to decide whether Polish and other complaints are legitimate or an opportunistic attempt to strike better terms.
