 News, Thursday, July 23, 2020 422 mots, p. 10

Australia faces legal challenge over risks to bonds from global warming

Fixed income
Jamie Smyth — Sydney

The Australian government is facing a class-action lawsuit from investors who allege it failed to disclose the material risks from climate change to its bonds, in what is thought to be the first case of its kind.

Student Kathleen O'Donnell, 23, who owns Australian government bonds that are traded on the country's main stock exchange, filed the civil action in the Federal Court yesterday.

The suit is the latest in a series of innovative legal challenges by Australian activists, who are pressing the government, companies and investors to take more action to tackle climate change.

"I want the Australian government to tell the truth about the risks posed by climate change," said Ms O'Donnell, who lives in a bushfire-affected part of Victoria and witnessed the devastation caused by fires that killed 34 people this year. The severity of the blazes sparked a fierce debate over whether climate change is to blame.

"I don't want to look towards a future where these types of bushfires are a common occurrence," she told the Financial Times. Australia's reliance on fossil fuels and its support for coal mining and gas development mean it remains one of the most emissionsintensive economies.

Investors following environmental, social and governance principles have targeted listed companies with poor climate credentials with divestment campaigns.

In recent months, green campaigners have launched legal actions against Australian pension funds and state bodies to push for more climate action. The class action suit argues that Australia's economy and international reputation will be significantly affected by the government's response to climate change and alleges authorities have failed to disclose these risks to investors.

As a promoter of its bonds, the government "owes a duty of utmost candour and honesty" to investors about the country's climate change risks, the court filing says.

The action seeks a declaration from the government that it breached its duty of disclosure by failing to address Australia's climate risks in information documents on the bonds.

An injunction restraining the government from further promoting exchange traded bonds until it complies with its duty of disclosure should be granted, it says.

Michael Burger, executive director of the Sabin Centre for Climate Change Law at Columbia University, said the legal action, which claims Canberra is in violation of securities law due to an alleged failure to disclose climate risks, appears to be a world first.

