 News, Tuesday, November 17, 2020 434 mots, p. 3

Investors urge Sunak to go beyond green finance plans

Climate change
SIOBHAN RIDING

Large investors are piling pressure on the government to take bolder action in the fight against climate change, despite green finance measures unveiled by the chancellor last week.

Following Rishi Sunak's announcement of plans to launch green gilts and require companies to make climate risk disclosures, asset managers are calling for additional commitments to the government's 2050 net-zero carbon target. The Investment Association, representing investors with £8.5tn in assets, called for "further action to consolidate the world-leading policy signalling that we have seen from the UK government".

In a paper to be submitted to the Treasury, it called for "pathway" policies for different sectors of the economy to facilitate their transition to net zero.

"The UK is now at a critical juncture as we look to honour our [net-zero] commitment," said Chris Cummings, IA chief executive. Fund managers stood ready to work with ministers to realise the change and ensure the UK remained a global leader in sustainable finance.

The call underscores the pressure on policymakers to be more ambitious in the fight against climate change. The debate is likely to become louder ahead of the Cop26 international climate talks in Glasgow next year and as Brexit prompts the UK to review its rule book in areas such as green finance.

While welcoming the green finance plans, investors urged caution on some elements. Royal London Asset Management, which manages £139bn in assets, warned that the green gilts could carry the risk of "greenwashing", depending on how they are structured.

In a letter to the chancellor, Piers Hillier, chief investment officer, pointed to the risk of the debt not being ringfenced and therefore being serviced by cash produced from other "less environmentally friendly activities".

The UK is keen to position itself as a world-leading green finance hub but other jurisdictions are also making strides to channel more private capital into sustainable projects, such as the EU's sustainable finance regulation.

While Britain has said it will develop a green classification system loosely based on the EU's sustainable "taxonomy", it has not committed to other parts of the EU package, such as sustainability disclosure requirements that will apply to European asset managers and financial advisers from next year.

The UK Sustainable Investment and Finance Association, whose members manage more than £10tn, has written to the Treasury asking it to set out its post-Brexit approach to green finance "without delay" or risk falling behind.

The Treasury said it understood the need for clarity on its post-Brexit policy and would set out further details in due course.
