 News, Tuesday, October 20, 2020 320 mots, p. 11

Air miles for climate change research top other fields
By Emma Gatten environment eDitor

CLIMATE-change researchers fly more than their counterparts in other disciplines, a study has found, suggesting that it may undermine their credibility.

A survey of more than 1,400 university researchers found that climate specialists took about five flights a year compared with four among researchers in other fields before the coronavirus pandemic.

Rates among climate scientists were even higher. Flying tends to increase with seniority, with professors in particular flying more than others, in the study led by Cardiff University.

Pre-pandemic aviation accounted for just above 2 per cent of global emis sions, but that figure is predicted to increase to a quarter by 2050, assuming levels bounce back.

"Our findings highlight that climate scientists, like many other professionals, can struggle to square their environmental commitments with
 professional and personal demands," said Prof Lorraine Whitmarsh, the director of the UK Centre for Climate and Social Transformation, which carried out the study.

Kevin Anderson, professor of energy and climate change at the University of Manchester and former director of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, said it made for "uncomfortable" reading. "This paper must be a catalyst for rapid change," he added.

Teenage climate activist Greta Thunberg is among those to have shunned flying for her global advocacy, travelling by yacht to New York last year where she addressed the United Nations climate change conference.

Bob Ward, the policy and communications director at the Grantham Research Institute on Climate Change at LSE, warned about attempts to "force or shame climate researchers into flying less", which he said "could be far more damaging if it reduces the quality and quantity of evidence and advice they provide to policy-makers about cutting greenhouse gas emissions".

25pc The predicted level of global emissions from aviation by 2050 if the rate returns to as it was before the coronavirus crisis
