Climate Point: Big oil is headed back to court while Congress considers paying for its cleanup    paying-its-cleanup/3258906001  Mark Olalde .  The oil and gas industry has had a weird year — haven't we all? — that hs seen its prices temporarily dip negative, the Rockefellers (of all people) divest and make money off the decision, and oil tankers act as floating reserves for the glut of product.  This week, the industry's winding path through 2020 continued as it was hit by two new lawsuits. On Wednesday, the state of Minnesota slapped ExxonMobil, Koch Industries and the American Petroleum Institute with a consumer fraud lawsuit, claiming the companies and trade group lied to the public about climate change for 30 years, the Star Tribune reports. A day later, E&E writes, Washington, D.C., also took on the oil supermajors, building a legal argument linking the petroleum industry's advertising practices to those employed by the tobacco industry.  But there's more to talk about than court cases, so here's some other important reporting....  MUST-READ STORIES  Cleanup vs. bailout. House Democrats on Monday unveiled a $1.5 trillion — yes, trillion with a T — package that bundled a coronavirus stimulus, an infrastructure bill and various other ideas that have sat on the shelf for years. In recent weeks, the idea of a New Deal-esque jobs program that would put oilfield workers back on the job plugging orphan oil and gas wells gained significant momentum. It was included in the package to the tune of $2 billion, which could be a huge environmental win if it leads to orphan well cleanup. On the other hand, it could be yet another fossil fuel industry subsidy. Energy News Network has the inside story.  Insult to injury. The Navajo Nation's per-capita coronavirus rate has been the worst in the country for much of the pandemic, and one cause that keeps popping up is a lack of access to clean water. Bloomberg reports that many Navajo citizens are pointing the finger at Peabody Energy, the country's largest coal-mining company, which they say "pulled so much water from the Navajo Aquifer before closing its last mining operation there last August that many wells and springs have run dry."     "Climate change is killing Americans." Columbia Journalism Investigations, the Center for Public Integrity and The Guardian put it pretty bluntly with that title. Their collaboration is out with an investigation that found heat-related deaths are on the rise, while federal programs meant to protect citizens from this growing threat have been left underfunded and floundering.  King Coal on its deathbed. The coal industry still looms large in America's politics and psyche, but the industry is rapidly losing its place in the country's energy mix, especially as the pandemic stalls demand. An investigation from environmental publication DeSmogBlog reveals that a potential insurance bubble could leave billions of dollars of coal mine cleanup costs unprotected — meaning we the taxpayers would be on the hook — exactly as the latter-day coal barons walk away.  POLITICAL CLIMATE  The never-ending story. The Salton Sea in Southern California has transformed in recent decades from leisure destination to a source of toxic, lung-damaging dust, as the shoreline recedes and exposes accumulated pollution. For The Desert Sun, I've got the latest on government infighting over the mishandling of habitat restoration projects that have gone unfinished for years.  Cap and trade hits tough times. California's cap and trade program has been an ambitious attempt to limit carbon dioxide emissions while making money for the state to use on environmental projects. But this year, the auction the state holds to sell pollution permits dropped from hundreds of millions of dollars to $25 million. Rachel Becker of CalMatters obtained a letter from the head of the state's environmental agency that revealed a plan to review the entire system.  Blowing up the desert. Benjamin Spillman at the Reno Gazette-Journal writes that Fallon Naval Air Station in Nevada was recently denied two proposals that would've given it an additional 900,000 acres for bombing and other training purposes. The decision was a win for several area tribes as well as conservationists who don't want to see more of the Desert National Wildlife Refuge given to the military, but their victory might only be temporary.  CONSERVATION RUNS INTO A WALL  Walled off. The Trump administration is barreling ahead with the president's border fence, KUNC in Arizona reports, which is now cutting across the San Pedro, the last free-flowing river in the Grand Canyon State. Construction of the border wall has been allowed to discount numerous laws, and local public officials and residents are worried about its impacts on flood control and wildlife there.  Strip mining the ocean. And if we're talking about extreme impacts to ecosystems, how about mining the ocean floor? Mongabay and the Cook Islands News report that the tourism-dependent economy of the remote island chain in the south Pacific Ocean     has been hit hard by the coronavirus pandemic, compelling its leaders to rethink protections for its marine exclusive economic zone. Now, they're considering opening it up to some of the world's first undersea strip mining, which could come with disastrous results to marine environments that would be blanketed with a plume of dumped mine waste.  We're yelling timber. In a narrative that seemingly mirrors the out-of-state landowners controlling the rolling hills of Appalachia, the Oregonian, Oregon Public Broadcasting and ProPublica report that Wall Street investors have bought up much of the Pacific Northwest's logging industry. Instead of smaller operations that try to preserve the industry, these investment firm-backed loggers aggressively clear cut forests, reduce biodiversity, remove the carbon-capturing benefits of old-growth trees and rely on tax breaks that leave Oregon with little to no benefit.  AND ANOTHER THING  Maybe we've still got a chance. Environmental news anymore is often politicians ignoring science, the mercury ever rising, and sea levels, well, also rising. But perhaps we have some good news that suggests we can still address our human-caused environmental catastrophes. Circle of Blue reports that California, Nevada and Arizona's use of the Colorado River in 2019 fell to a 33-year low, as cities saw significant gains in conservation and efficiency.  Here are the latest numbers:      