UN report: Climate change continues 'unabated' despite COVID-19 lockdowns    lockdowns/5768993002  Doyle Rice | USA TODAY  Emissions are heading in the direction of pre- pandemic levels following a temporary decline. "Greenhouse gas concentrations – which are already at their highest levels in 3 million years – have continued to rise." Record heat, ice loss, wildfires, floods and droughts continue to worsen.  Climate change has not stopped because of COVID-19, a United Nations report says.  "Greenhouse gas concentrations – which are already at their highest levels in 3 million years – have continued to rise," said World Meteorological Organization Secretary- General Petteri Taalas, in a statement.   Emissions are heading in the direction of pre-pandemic levels following a temporary decline caused by the lockdown and economic slowdown, the report released Wednesday said. The burning of fossil fuels such as oil, gas and coal produce greenhouse gases such as carbon dioxide and methane, which are responsible for global warming.   “This has been an unprecedented year for people and the planet. The COVID-19 pandemic has disrupted lives worldwide. At the same time, the heating of our planet and climate disruption have continued apace,” said United Nations Secretary-General António Guterres in a foreword to the report.  In more grim news, the report also said the world is getting closer to passing a temperature limit set by global leaders five years ago and may exceed it in the next decade or so.   In the next five years, the world has nearly a 1-in-4 chance of experiencing a year that’s hot enough to put the global temperature at 2.7 degrees Fahrenheit (1.5 degrees Celsius) above pre-industrial times, the report said.  That 1.5 degrees Celsius is the more stringent of two limits set in 2015 by world leaders in the Paris climate change agreement.     The warming that has already occurred has “increased the odds of extreme events that are unprecedented in our historical experience,” Stanford University climate scientist Noah Diffenbaugh said.   More pandemics? Scientists are seeing an 'acceleration of pandemics.' They are looking at climate change.  Taalas said "large swaths of Siberia have seen a prolonged and remarkable heat wave during the first half of 2020, which would have been very unlikely without anthropogenic (human-caused) climate change. And now 2016–2020 is set to be the warmest five-year period on record.   "This report shows that while many aspects of our lives have been disrupted in 2020, climate change has continued unabated,” Taalas said.   The latest report was the U.N.’s annual update on “climate disruption” caused by the burning of coal, oil and gas. It highlighted more than just increasing temperatures and rising sea levels.  “Record heat, ice loss, wildfires, floods and droughts continue to worsen, affecting communities, nations and economies around the world,” Guterres wrote.  Closer to home, the U.S. just experienced its fourth-hottest summer (June-August) on record, the National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration announced Wednesday.   Arizona, Connecticut, Rhode Island and Massachusetts each reported their warmest summer on record. Eleven additional states had a top-5 warmest summer, NOAA said.  Contributing: The Associated Press      