In California: As fires rage, governor says, ‘This is a climate damn emergency.’    emergency/3471712001  Cheri Carlson | USA TODAY As wildfires continue to rage in the Golden State, the death toll has reached 20 and the governor promises to redouble efforts to decarbonize the state. Plus: Inmate firefighters get some help.  I'm Cheri Carlson, a reporter at the Ventura County Star, with the news to know headed into the weekend.  But first, here’s a story about a tiny kitten that survived the Bear Fire. The mewing "fire cat" found some safety inside a firefighter’s jacket pocket, escaping the still-smoldering ash.  In California brings you top Golden State stories and commentary from across the USA TODAY Network and beyond. Get it free, straight to your inbox.  'A climate damn emergency'  The hottest August in state history. Record-breaking temperatures. Drought. Millions of dead trees and 14,000 dry lightning strikes in three days.   Gov. Gavin Newsom said Friday: “The debate is over around climate change. Just come to the state of California, observe it with your own eyes."  The Associated Press said he pledged to redouble efforts to “decarbonize" the economy as he toured Butte County where the North Complex Fire ripped through the town of Berry Creek this week.  Newsom also warned the nation that the record wildfire season may be a glimpse into its future, the San Francisco Chronicle reported. Political leaders need to start taking the climate crisis seriously, he said.  “I’m a little bit exhausted that we have to continue to debate this issue," Newsom said. "This is a climate damn emergency. This is real and it’s happening."  It is only a matter a time before climate change also takes a major toll on the tourism industry, including in the Palm Springs area and elsewhere. As the number of hot days piles up, "snowbird season" could be cut by more than a third, The Desert Sun reports.  Death toll climbs; firefighting inmates get some help     Crews reported some progress on California's fires Friday. The death toll, however, climbed to 20. Half of those victims died in the North Complex Fire burning near Oroville, according to the Los Angeles Times.   One was a 16-year-old boy from Berry Creek. He was remembered by family members as outdoorsy and adventurous.  Each year, the state's firefighting force includes hundreds of inmates trained in California's prison system. Now, a new law will help give them a shot at becoming professional firefighters once they complete their sentences.  The Associated Press reported the governor has signed legislation to allow state and county inmates who train as firefighters to seek to erase their criminal records. Those records often are a bar to employment.  “These individuals have received valuable training and placed themselves in danger to defend the life and property of Californians,” said Assemblywoman Eloise Reyes, a Democrat from San Bernardino who authored the bill.  A grim anniversary; planning for mass vaccinations  Communities around the country Friday honored the lives lost 19 years ago in the  terrorist attacks. In Ventura County, people gathered outside a fire station early Friday morning.  Mass vaccination clinics at stadiums or other large venues? It's possible, Ventura County's Public Health Officer told the Ventura County Star. When a vaccine becomes available, medical volunteers could be asked to perform COVID-19 vaccinations in mass clinics and local hospitals could also be tapped to deliver shots.  Planning to head outdoors this weekend? First, here's a reminder that smoky skies continue to blanket the state and the San Jose Mercury News reports it may stay that way for a while. Air quality alerts have been issued both near and far from where the fires are burning.  Before we go, here's a column from USA Today editor-in-chief Nicole Carroll taking you behind the scenes as the Network's journalists cover a record-setting wildfire season.  In California is a roundup of news from across USA TODAY Network newsrooms. Also contributing: Los Angeles Times, San Francisco Chronicle and the San Jose Mercury News.      