

The New York Times (web site)
Wednesday, February 3, 2021 -  578 mots

Biden’s pick to run the E.P.A. tells lawmakers he will ‘move
with a sense of urgency’ on climate change.

By Lisa Friedman

Michael S. Regan, President Biden’s nominee for administrator of the Environmental Protection Agency,
vowed during his conﬁrmation hearing on Wednesday to “move with a sense of urgency” in reducing planet-
warming   greenhouse   gas   emissions,   while   facing   tough   questions   about   his   role   in   an   administration
crowded with high-proﬁle climate czars.

If conﬁrmed, Mr. Regan, the secretary of North Carolina’s Department of Environmental Quality, will be
tasked with reinstating dozens of Obama-era regulations that the Trump administration scrapped, and in
many cases ensuring they are even more far-reaching. That includes reimposing national fuel-efﬁciency
standards; plugging oil and gas wells that leak methane, a powerful short-term greenhouse gas; and possibly
reimposing limits on emissions from power plants.

Yet Mr. Regan sought to allay Republican fears that the E.P.A. was poised to enact onerous new rules
intended to hurt the fossil fuel industries that bring jobs to many of their states.

“I have also learned that we can’t simply regulate our way out of every problem we face,” Mr. Regan told
lawmakers, pledging to be “collaborative” with states and to “work transparently with responsible industries
eager to establish clear, consistent rules of the road.”

Mr. Regan will also be charged with rebuilding the agency, which lost nearly 5,000 employees during the
Trump era and saw the morale of career employees plummet.

He   is   intended   to   round   out   the   administration’s   climate   team,   joining   Gina   McCarthy,   who   served   as
President Barack Obama’s E.P.A. chief and will lead a new White House Ofﬁce of Climate Policy to coordinate
domestic efforts, and John Kerry, the former secretary of state, who will be Mr. Biden’s international climate
envoy.

Senator Tom Carper, Democrat of Delaware, who will become the chairman of the Senate Committee on
Environment and Public Works, called Mr. Regan “the right person to lead the Environmental Protection
Agency during this critical time.”

Senator   Shelley   Moore   Capito,   Republican   of   West   Virginia,   said   the   Biden   administration’s   “barrage   of
executive orders” on climate change left her worried about the fate of her state’s economy.

“I am concerned that this is shaping up to be a third Obama administration,” she said.

Noting that she was concerned that “unconﬁrmed and unaccountable czars on climate” like Ms. McCarthy
and Mr. Kerry would not be subject to “really any congressional oversight,” she asked Mr. Regan how his role
would be distinguished from Ms. McCarthy’s, particularly if a dispute arises.

Mr. Regan sidestepped the question, saying that “with any complex issue, we anticipate healthy debates.”

Mr. Regan has won praise for working with both Republicans and Democrats on issues like a major coal ash
settlement in North Carolina. The state’s two Republican senators, Richard Burr and Thom Tillis, introduced
Mr. Regan, and both indicated they planned to support his nomination — an early sign that his conﬁrmation
is not likely to meet with serious opposition.

“We have to understand that the election produced a different leader down in the White House,” Mr. Tillis
said, adding that Republicans need to hope for “people in the administration who have a track record of
listening” and ﬁnding middle ground.

“He will sometimes take on initiatives that I will disagree with, most likely vote against,” Mr. Tillis added. “But I
do believe he is somebody we can rely on to be fair.”

 



