

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Tuesday, March 30, 2021 348 mots, p. 12

'Global warming' behind £100k damage to ﬁreplace ﬁt for a
king

By Craig Simpson

THE National Trust has blamed climate change for water damage to a 10-ton marble ﬁreplace, which has
cost £100,000 to repair.

It said the Victorian gutters at Cragside in Northumberland were being overwhelmed by increasingly wet
winters and water damage was spreading through the property like a "disease".

The house, which was owned by Lord William Armstrong, a 19th-cen tury industrialist, was the ﬁrst to be lit
by hydroelectric power.

Its 3m-wide ﬁreplace, completed to impress the future King Edward VII on a royal visit, is crumbling as a
result of heavy rainfall, and the trust said it had spent £100,000 to conserve the structure, which has been
weakened by water seeping into the marble.

Clara Woolford, property curator at Cragside, said: "Almost like a disease, it starts in a small area and spreads
through the weak sections of stone.

"If untreated, the ﬁreplace could crumble quickly."

She added: "The Victorian drainage system doesn't support 21st-century weather conditions. Winters at
Cragside are wetter and much longer, due to climate change.

"We are more prone to signiﬁcant bursts of rain and stormy weather.

"The drainage system is now visibly overwhelmed by water, which pours from the gutters and cascades
down the outer wall."

The pressure of moisture entering the stone forces out natural salts, making the structure crumble. The trust
has used donations to fund a £100,000 project to draw out the salts and seal off the stone from future water
ingress.

A material called "nano-lime" will be used to penetrate the marble and restabilise the internal structure of
the ﬁreplace, which dominates Cragside's drawing room and was ﬁnished in time to warm the Prince and
Princess of Wales, the future King Edward VII and Queen Alexandra, in 1884.

The property of Newcastle ship manufacturer Lord Armstrong was chosen for a royal visit because its hydro-
powered electric lighting and central heating made it more modern and luxurious than royal residences of
the time.

