

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Tuesday, January 12, 2021 616 mots, p. 8

Butterﬂy population cut by half over past 45 years
Destruction of meadows, drought and climate change leads to extinction of one in 10 UK
species

By Olivia Rudgard environment correspondent

ALMOST one in 10 British butterﬂy species has become extinct due to meadow destruction, scientists claim
in a new study.

Eight per cent of species have been lost in the UK, researchers said, with the overall butterﬂy population cut
in half since the Seventies.

Two of the ﬁve species that went extinct became so in the past 45 years, though conservation efforts have
successfully revived one of them, the Phengaris arion, or large blue.

Lead author Martin Warren, head of development for Butterﬂy Conservation Europe, said the ﬁrst extinction
took place in the 1850s after the large copper butterﬂy lost its habitat, the East Anglian fenland, which was
mechanically drained for agricultural purposes.

Since then, other species have been affected as wildﬂower meadows were replaced with farmland, depriving
the creatures of food sources and breeding grounds. In the Sixties, it led to the decline to extinction of the
large tortoiseshell butterﬂy.

Dr Warren said: "Most people look across the landscape and think it looks green and lovely, which it does in
many respects. But of course, the green is usually just one or two species of grass. Most grassland has now
been reseeded with perennial ryegrass because it's more productive for animals. It looks nice at a distance
but it doesn't have wildﬂowers."

Species   started   to   decline   at  the   turn   of   the   20th   century   due   to   intensive   agriculture,   said   the   study,
published in the journal Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.

Of species currently found in the UK, 20 are in decline, 21 are stable, and just nine ﬂourishing.

Some of the most threatened species, such as the pearl-bordered fritillary, thrive in open spaces in woodland
and have been hit by the decline in coppicing, the traditional method of cutting trees right back to allow
regrowth.

Fragmented habitat is also a signiﬁcant issue for British butterﬂies, as is pollution from insecticides and
nitrogen from intensive agriculture and vehicle pollution. Despite these issues Dr Warren was hopeful the
British butterﬂy would recover.

Recent efforts have helped some species - in particular, the Hamearis lucina, or Duke of Burgundy Butterﬂy .

Numbers have trebled in the North

Downs in Kent after a project to create woodland clearings and boost plants such as the cowslip to provide
habitats and food.

Dr Warren said a growing interest in rewilding was welcome, but smaller landowners and farmers could be
urged to promote insect life on their land.

"Butterﬂies live in very speciﬁc areas. They need a certain type of management, so if that doesn't carry on,
they will disappear. But on the plus side, if you restore those habitats and management, then they come
back," he said.

Butterﬂies are better studied than other species and have been monitored for longer, meaning they stand a
greater chance of recovery, he added.



Aporia crataegi, the black-veined white butterﬂy, which became extinct in the 1920s, was a favourite of

 



Winston Churchill, though his attempts to reintroduce it at Chartwell failed.


While habitat loss is the biggest concern, the modern decline in species has been linked to the 1976 drought
- the driest summer since 1772 - from which some species never recovered.

In   a   separate   paper   also   published   in   Proceedings   of   the   National   Academy   of   Sciences,   American
researchers   warned   that   insects   were   vulnerable   to   the   effects   of   climate change,   citing   several   UK
population "crashes" of butterﬂies and moths linked to extreme weather over the past 50 years.

The study stated: "Climate change impacts on insects have the potential to be considerable, even when
compared with changes in land use."


 


