Gigatonne gap in the EU pledge for Paris Climate Summit September 2015  Gigatonne gap in the EU pledge for Paris Climate Summit SUMMARY Developing the EU’s emission reduction target for 2030 into a budget similar to the commitments of the EU under the Kyoto Protocol faces a number of challenges. Many elements that will enable us to define that budget are still unclear. Depending on the policy choices that EU Member States will make on the future design of the Emissions Trading Scheme, and  the  policies  to  tackle  all  other  emissions,  including  those  from  the  forestry sector, there will be a substantial difference in the total amount of greenhouse gases the EU will emit in the period 2021 to 2030. The difference between the best and the worst set of decisions is a staggering 6 billion tonnes of greenhouse gas emissions. This is 30% more than the total greenhouse gas emissions from the EU in 2012.In the most ambitious scenario, average annual emission reductions for the whole period would be around 35% below 1990 emissions. In the least ambitious scenario average annual emission reductions would be less than 25% below 1990 emissions. In this worst case scenario, instead of significantly decreasing emissions, the EU would bring emissions only marginally below its 2020 Kyoto Protocol target of minus 20%. Such a scenario would undermine the EU’s ability to play a leadership role in the international climate negotiations. EU leaders must send a clear message to the world that this scenario is not going to happen. GIGATONNE GAP IN THE EU PLEDGE FOR PARIS CLIMATE SUMMIT2IntroductionIn October 2014, the leaders of the European Union agreed  to  reduce  its  greenhouse  gas  emissions  by  at  least 40% by 20301. This is the proposal the EU also brings to the international negotiations as the follow-up of the EU’s commitments under the Kyoto Protocol. However, there is a substantial difference as the EU’s 2030 target is a so-called single-year target, while the Kyoto Protocol targets are multi-year targets, defining emission reductions for a number of years, first for the period 2008 to 2012 and then for the period 2013 to 20202. The EU has not yet defined the emission reductions it wants to achieve in the period 2021 to 2030, and should do so. Because  CO2  and  other  greenhouse  gases  stay  in  the  atmosphere for centuries, they build up over time. This is why it is the total cumulative emissions that matter  to  the  atmosphere  and  that  ultimately  determine  the level of change in our climate. Under a single-year target a country only makes a commitment to reduce emissions  for  the  target  year  but  not  for  the  period  leading up to that target. Under a multi-year target, a  country  makes  a  commitment  to  reduce  emissions  every year of the period between 2021 and 2030.It  is  crucial  for  the  success  of  the  new  international  climate  agreement  to  be  made  in  Paris  that  countries convert their single-year targets into multi-year emission budgets. Hence why it is important for the EU’s credibility that its 2030 target is translated into an  emissions  budget  for  the  period  from  2021  to  2030. This is also the reason why it is vital that this conversion is done in a way that shows leadership and ambition; This  conversion  will  depend  on  a  number  of  deci-sions that EU Member States will take in the coming months and years. Based on the level of ambition that EU ministers and their governments put into these decisions, the conversion of the single-year target in a budget can be very different. Several decisions on how to implement the 2030 target have already been taken by Heads of State and Government, but many important elements have not been decided upon. It will be up to EU policy-makers to take ambitious and bold decisions. Before  converting  the  EU  target  into  a  budget,  the following issues need to be noted:•  While many countries still    need to   finalise their    INDCs, it  is  already clear     that    there is  a gap  between  current  commitments  and  the  action  that  is  needed  to  keep  temperature  rise  below  the  agreed  threshold  of  2°C.  All  countries will therefore need to revise their targets upwards. This is also the case for the EU.  CAN  Europe  considers  the  EU’s  at  least  40%  emission  reduction  target  neither  ambitious nor   fair.    We   continue our   call    for   the EU   to   substantially increase its   2030 target to  at  least  55%.  In  this  paper  however,  we  focus on   analysing the   impact of   the   at  least 40% target;•  The current EU   target runs    till   2030. CAN    calls for   five    year    commitment periods, and    thus 2025 targets, to allow targets to be compared to   progress in   scientific findings on   needed emission reductions;•  The October Council Conclusions and    the EU’s  INDC  are  silent  on  how  emissions  from  international   transport   (aviation   and   shipping)  will  be  reduced.  It  is  essential  that  the  Paris  agreement  addresses  how  and  where  emissions  from  international  transport  will  be   accounted for   and    substantially reduced. In  this  exercise  emissions  from  international  transport  have  not  been  included  in  the  EU’s  carbon budget for 2021 to 2030. Countries decided at the 2012 Climate Summit in Dur-ban that after 2020, a new climate agreement should come into effect which should ensure that all countries commit to climate action. At the 2013 Climate Summit in Warsaw all countries agreed to prepare their initial commitments for greenhouse gas emission reductions after 2020, well ahead of the Climate Summit in Paris in December 2015. These commitments are called IN-DCs: Intended Nationally Determined Contributions. Unfortunately  governments  did  not  come  to  a  substantial agreement on what information should be included in these INDCs. Therefore much work will have to  be  done,  as  part  of  the  Paris  deal,  to  make  these  commitments  quantifiable,  comparable  and  verifiable.  Only  then  will  the  international  community  be  able  to  check  whether  a  country  actually  meets  its  commitments or not. The EU states in its INDC3  from  6  March  2015:  “The EU  and  its  Member  States  are  committed  to  a  binding  target of an at least 40% domestic reduction in green-house gas emissions by 2030 compared to 1990, to be fulfilled jointly, as set out in the conclusions by the European Council of October 2014.”4The INDC further clarifies that these reductions need to take place in the EU without the use of international offsets, and indicates that this target will be implemented  through  specific  legislation  on  both  emissions  covered  under  the  Emissions  Trading  Scheme (ETS) and emissions from the non-ETS sectors (which up till 2020 are covered under the Effort Sharing Deci-sion – ESD). While not mentioned in the EU INDC, the October  Council  Conclusions  specify  that  the  reduction target for the ETS will be 43% by 2030 and for the non-ETS sectors it will be 30% by 2030, both com-pared to 2005 emission levels.The INDC is vague on how it will include emissions and removals from Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF) and states: “Policy on how to include Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry into the 2030 greenhouse  gas  mitigation  framework  will  be  established as soon as technical conditions allow and in any case before 2020”. In other words, LULUCF is to be included in the 2030 policy framework, but it is unclear which baseline will be used (as opposed to the 1990 baseline for all other emissions) and whether emissions and removals from LULUCF will be part of the 40% target. No backsliding The European Union is a strong defender of the ‘no backsliding’ principle. This means that countries’ tar-gets for the period after 2020 should not be less ambitious  than  their  2020  commitments.  Applying  this  principle to the EU, it means we need to compare the current 2030 target with the EU’s commitment under the Kyoto Protocol. The current commitment of the EU is to reduce its emissions by on average 20% in the period 2013 to 2020. Applying this concept of an average 40% reduction for the period 2021 to 2030 would be very different than the linear reduction that is currently assumed in the INDC.As the graph indicates, a Kyoto type target of -40% would reduce total emissions in the EU28 in this period  to  33.8  GtCO2-e,  while  a  linear  reduction  from  -20% in 2020 to -40% in 2030 would allow the EU to emit 5 billion tonnes more.Therefore, in order to judge whether the EU’s target is  not  backsliding,  one  needs  to  calculate  the  exact  budget that the EU will emit between 2021 and 2030. For this to be done, a number of decisions still need to be made. We have calculated the possible EU’s carbon budget in different scenarios. Calculating the EU’s carbon budgetIn the next sections we calculate the EU’s carbon budget for 2021-2030 assuming linear reduction pathways for both the emissions covered by the ETS and those not covered by the ETS. The result of this calculation depends on a number of decisions that still have to be made, and those decisions will define the level of ambition of the EU’s 2021 to 2030 emissions budget. Basically the budget will depend on:•   The total ETS emissions (or ETS allowances) for the period 2021 to 2030;•   The total non-ETS emissions (or non-ETS allowances) for the period 2021 to 2030;•   The decision whether LULUCF will be part of the 40% target;•   The way emissions and removals from LULUCF will be accounted for. Based on the different options to convert the 2030 target into an emission budget we developed three scenarios: a current legislation scenario, a climate pollution scenario, and a climate action scenario Emissions budget under the Emissions Trading SchemeThe ETS covers 45% of the EU’s greenhouse gas emissions  and  includes  approximately  11  000  factories,  power  plants  and  other  installations.  The  cap  is  reduced annually by a so called Linear Reduction Factor, so the number of available allowances decreases every year. The 2020 ETS target requires reductions of 21% below 2005 levels. The October Council conclusions set the ETS target for 2030 to 43% below 2005 emissions and changed the Linear Reduction Factor from the current 1.74% to 2.2% per year for the period 2021 to 2030. The    EU   is  currently discussing how    it  should reform  its  ETS  for  the  post-2020  period.  In  July   2015, the  European Commission released its proposal for this reform5. For the cumulative emissions budget of the ETS three things matter: 1.  Whether EU   Member States will    continue to allow full carry-over of surplus allowances;2. The size of the surplus that can be carried over; and3.  How much of   the    surplus will    remain in   the Market Stability Reserve at the end of 2030.An  enormous  oversupply  of  unused  allowances  has built  up  in  the  ETS  due  to  a  combination  of  factors,  such as a weak reduction target, the massive use of international offsets, and a static policy design without built-in  adjustments  to  adapt  to  changes  in  demand.  The  current  ETS  legislation  allows  companies  to  carry-over all unused allowances from the period 2013 to  2020  to  the  period  after  2020,  thereby  increasing  the number of available emission allowances in the period between 2021 and 2030. The European Commission expects this surplus to grow to 2.6 billion by 20206, while others such as the UK government project it to be much higher7. In our calculations we use the conservative European Commission’s projection.  Despite  the  fact  that  during  the  negotiations  on  the  second  commitment  period  of  the  Kyoto  Protocol, many countries including the EU expressed concern over an unlimited carry-over of unused emission allowances, the European Commission’s proposal on the reform of the ETS does not limit the carry-over.. Even while it seems unlikely, this as such does not rule out that Member States might still decide that all or part of the surplus should be cancelled. In both the current legislation and climate pollution scenarios we assume full carry-over and no cancellation. In the climate action  scenario  we  assume  that  the  2.6  billion  surplus  ETS allowances will be cancelled.Given the current surplus of emission allowances has lowered the price of carbon to record low levels, the European Union agreed to establish a Market Stability Reserve (MSR) that, in case of oversupply temporarily removes surplus allowances from the market. The MSR will thus take several billions of allowances from the market but these will eventually come back. For all three scenarios, we use Sandbag’s estimates that predict that under the current MSR design around 400 million allowances will remain in the MSR till at least the end of 2030.8Emissions budget for the non-ETS sectorsThe Effort Sharing Decision (ESD) establishes binding annual greenhouse gas emission targets for Member States for 2013–2020 for the sectors that are not covered  under  the  ETS.  These  include  transport,  buildings, agriculture and waste. (LULUCF and international transport emissions are currently neither covered under the ETS nor under the ESD.) Legally the ESD comes to an end in 2020 but it is very likely that it will be revised and will continue for the period 2021 to 2030. The October Council Conclusions set the 2030 target for non-ETS emissions to 30% below the 2005 emission level.For  the  cumulative  emissions  budget  of  the  non-ETS sectors two things matter:1. The starting point in 2020; 2.  How  the  surplus  of  unused  emission  allowances from     the   period 2013 to   2020 will    be dealt with.Unlike for the ETS budget, as the ESD ends in 2020, the  starting  point  for  the  calculation  of  the  non-ETS  emissions budget has not been defined yet (see de-tails in annex). If the budget starts from the 2020 ESD emissions target (10% below 2005 levels) the emission  budget  will  likely  be  bigger  than  if  the  starting  point would be at actual emission levels in 2020. This is because actual emissions are projected to be 11% to  15%  below  2005  levels9,  which  is  considerably  lower than the 2020 target. In the climate pollution scenario we assume a 2020 ESD target starting point. In the current legislation scenario we assume that the approach used for the current ESD is copied: a starting point based on the average emissions between 2016 and 2018. In the climate  action  scenario  we  use  a  more  ambitious  starting  point  with  the  lowest  projected  emissions  for 2020.As in the ETS, Member States are projected to over-shoot the ESD 2020 target and therefore accumulate a  surplus  of  ESD  allowances.  The  EEA  projects  the  ESD surplus for the period 2013-2020 to be 700 to 1 950 million allowances10.  This  projection  includes  the full use of offsets, though as most governments will reach their ESD target with domestic measures, it is unlikely that governments will use the full num-ber  of  offsets  they  would  be  allowed  to  use.  We therefore use the most conservative estimate of 700 million surplus allowances. As the Effort Sharing Decision comes to an end in 2020, the legislation does not provide for the carry-over of surplus allowances to the period after 2020. Nevertheless  several  Member  States  have  already stated that they would like to be able to carry over their  surplus.  In  the  current  legislation  and  the  climate  action  scenario  we  assume  no  carry-over  of ESD surplus. In the climate pollution scenario we assume Member States will agree the full carry-over of ESD surplus allowances. LULUCF emissions in the carbon budgetThe 2020 EU climate policy framework does not include  a  target  for  CO2 emissions and removals from Land Use, Land Use Change and Forestry (LULUCF). Non-CO2  emissions  from  agriculture  are  currently  covered  under  the  ESD,  and  CO2  emissions  and  removals  from  certain  LULUCF  activities  are  covered under the EU’s Kyoto Protocol target. The particularity of LULUCF is that the sector includes activities that cause  emissions  but  also  can  lead  to  carbon  being  taken up and stored. Currently LULUCF is a net sink in the EU, i.e. it removes more carbon than it releases. It is projected to remain a sink until 2030 but the sink will probably decline. For  the  EU’s  cumulative  emissions  budget  two  things matter most: 1.  Whether emissions and   removals from    LULUCF will account for reaching the 40% target; 2.  Which accounting rules, and    more particularly  which baselines (or   reference levels), will be   agreed for   the    different activities under LULUCF. The   October   2014   European   Council   Conclusions   provide for the inclusion of the LULUCF sector in the post-2020  climate  and  energy  policy  framework,  but  leave open how this should be done and whether that means LULUCF would contribute to meeting the 40% overall target. Including removals from LULUCF in the overall target would allow the non-LULUCF sectors to increase their emissions.  The  inclusion  would  therefore  reduce  the  need  for  emission  reductions  in  the  non-ETS  sectors.  This  is  especially  troubling  because  emission  reductions in the LULUCF sector can be reversed (e.g. forest fires) and because accurately accounting for these reductions is difficult at best. Therefore LULUCF should be covered under a separate target that will not dilute the level of ambition of the overall target. For the cli-mate  pollution  and  the  current  legislation  scenarios  we assume that LULUCF will be included in the 40% target. In the climate action scenario we assume LULUCF will be kept out of the 40% target.For the two scenarios that would allow for LULUCF to be included in the at least 40% target, the benefit of doing so can be substantially different depending on the  accounting  rules  that  Member  States  will  agree  upon. In the most stringent of five cases with the same human activity but different accounting rules, developed  by  the  Öko-Institut, the LULUCF sector would actually  account  for  annual  emissions  of  17  million  tonnes  of  CO2,  while  in  the  least  stringent  account-ing case LULUCF activities would account for annual removals of 183 million tonnes of CO2 in 2030. For the current legislation scenario we based our numbers on a  case  with  accounting  rules  and  forest  management  reference levels based on the current Kyoto Protocol rules. For the climate pollution scenario, we assumed accounting  rules  that  lead  to  the  weakest  overall emissions budget.The likely, the better and the worstBased on the different options to convert the 2030 target into an emissions budget we developed three  legislation scenarioThis scenario is based on the current rules for the ETS and the ESD: full carry-over of surpluses under the ETS and no carry-over of surpluses under the ESD. It assumes  the  reductions  under  the  ESD  to  start  from  2016-2018 emission levels, equivalent to what was done for the start of the ESD in 2013. It also includes the assumption that LULUCF will be included in the ESD target, with accounting rules similar to those currently used in the Kyoto Protocol.Climate action scenarioThis scenario assumes that EU Member States will take decisions that provide the highest level of climate action, based on the agreed but insufficient 40% target. This includes a decision to fully cancel the ETS surplus and prevent the carry-over of surplus from the ESD. Furthermore reductions for the non-ETS sectors would start from the most ambitious projected emission lev-els for 2020, and emissions and removals from LULUCF would be accounted for in a separate pillar with emissions and removals of the LULUCF sector not diluting the 40% target.Climate pollution scenarioThis scenario assumes EU Member States to go from bad to worse and not only allow the full carry-over of all  unused  allowances  under  the  ETS  but  also  accept  legislation that allows full carry-over of the surplus ESD  emissions.  Moreover,  governments  would  decide  for  the  non-ETS  emissions  budget  to  start  from  the  weak  2020  target,  and  allow  the  full  inclusion  of  removals from LULUCF in this target, while adopting accounting rules with least stringency.The results are quite staggering. The same mi-nus    40%     target in   2030 will    lead    to   average annual reductions for   the   2021-2030 period of only    24%     under the   climate pollution scenario, 27% under the current legislation scenario and    35%    under the   climate action scenario. In terms of actual emissions the climate pollution scenario will    lead    to   almost 43   billion tonnes of  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  whereas  under  the  climate  action  scenario  it  will  be  around  37   billion tonnes. This    means 6  billion tonnes of  a  difference. This    is  30%    more     than    the   EU’s total  emissions  in  2012.  The  table  and  graphs  below show these results in more details. GIGATONNE GAP IN THE EU PLEDGE FOR PARIS CLIMATE SUMMIT10RecommendationsEU Member States need to, in the run up and after the Paris Climate  the level of ambition of its commitment by adopting a 2030 target of at least 55% greenhouse gas emission reductions by 2030.Ensure the EU is not backtracking on the type of commitments it makes in the international negotiations, and develop a carbon budget for the periods 2021 to 2025 and 2021 to 2030.Agree to cancel surplus allowances under the reform of the ETS Directive and publicly declare not to seek carry-over of ESD surplus allowances.Ensure the non-ETS emissions budget starts from the most realistic projections of where emissions will be in 2020.Agree to develop a new pillar, next to the ETS and the ESD to deal with emissions and removals from LULUCF.Agree to set accounting rulesthat reflect what the atmosphere sees in terms of emissions and removals from LULUCF