ANNUAL REVIEW INT 2015 together possible TM   Front cover © NASA WWF is one of the world's largest and most experienced independent conservation organizations, with over 5 million supporters and a global network active in more than 100 countries. WWF's mission is to stop the degradation of the planet's natural environment and to build a future in which people live in harmony with nature, by conserving the world's biological diversity, ensuring that the use of renewable natural resources is sustainable, and promoting the reduction of pollution and wasteful consumption. A WWF International production Written and edited by Barney Jeffries,  Design: Stéfane Mauris, WWF International Printed by NCP SA and Pressor SA, Switzerland The designation of geographical entities in this report, and the presentation of the material, do not imply the expression of any opinion whatsoever on the part of WWF concerning the legal status of any country, territory, or area, or of its authorities, or concerning the delimitation of its frontiers or boundaries. Published in April 2016 by WWF ­ World Wide Fund For Nature (Formerly World Wildlife Fund), Gland, Switzerland   In little more than a generation, Shenzhen has grown from a market town of 30,000 people to a megacity with a population of more than 18 million. Across the water, Hong Kong is one of the most densely populated cities in the world, with 7.2 million inhabitants. Yet in between, the marshes, mudflats and mangroves of the Mai Po Nature Reserve, managed by WWF-Hong Kong, provide a haven for wildlife. More than 90,000 migratory birds from around 380 species pass through the reserve each year. As the global human population continues to grow and becomes increasingly urban, it's more important than ever to find ways for people and nature to thrive side by side. That, in a nutshell, is what WWF is here for.   Humanity's relationship with the planet is changing profoundly. We have entered the "anthropocene" ­ an era of humans driving planetary change. Last year was the hottest on record, with 2016 expected to be hotter still and global temperatures already 1°C above preindustrial levels.  Yolanda Kakabadse President WWF International  To prevent catastrophic climate change, we must transform our dirty fossil fuel economy to one based on clean renewable energy. And this is but one of the major challenges we face. We must transform global food systems to sustainably and equitably feed a growing population without further devastating our environment. We must ensure access to sufficient freshwater resources for people and nature, an issue identified by the World Economic Forum as the biggest threat to the global economy for three years running. In the face of unprecedented pressure on natural systems, we need to refocus and redouble our efforts to defend and enhance the value of our oceans, forests and wildlife for the future well-being of people.  "Together with others, we will change the unsustainable course the world is on to build  Nature remains under huge pressure. But 2015 has provided hope as the entire world came together around the Sustainable Development Goals and forged an unprecedented agreement on climate. WWF has played a key role in these and many other successes. But we can do more. And we will. We are undergoing a significant change, building on our unique strengths, to evolve WWF to match our own ambitions. Together with others, we will change the unsustainable course the world is on to build a future in harmony with nature. Because we know that together...anything is possible!  a future in harmony  with nature."   EXTRAORDINARY TIMES Marco Lambertini Director General WWF International "There has never been a more exciting or challenging time for WWF, or indeed for the entire environmental movement."  We are living in extraordinary times. Times of unprecedented risk but also unparalleled opportunity for the future of our planet and our society.  A time when the world's wildlife has been halved in less than a generation; oceans, rivers and forests are struggling to cope with our growing pressure upon them; and when we are still on a path toward catastrophic climate change impacts.  But this is also a time when the science is clearer than ever before. Awareness is at an all-time high, commitments are more ambitious.  2015 was a record year for investment in renewables and divestment from fossil fuels; a terrible year for the number of elephants and rhinos killed in Africa by poachers, but also a year when a historic UN resolution recognized wildlife crime and its impact on governance, security and sustainable development. And while the percentage of the ocean that is protected remains shamefully low, governments announced new marine protected areas covering millions of hectares.  And then we have the Sustainable Development Goals (SDGs) that bring together the economic, social and environmental agendas like never before; the landmark Paris Agreement on climate where almost 200 governments, including all major emitters, committed to contain global warming; and a growing number of corporations committing to address climate change, assuming responsibility for using natural resources sustainably and greening their supply chains.  Hundreds of millions of people are using social media and are taking to the streets, making their voices heard about the future they want. The world has never been more conscious of the problems and solutions, or more committed to addressing them.  We have already entered a great transition  toward an ecologically sustainable and more  equitable future for all. The scale and pace of  this transition will define success or failure.  WWF can't miss this opportunity to capitalize  on the momentum.       This is why we are transforming the way we work. We need a 21st century WWF that more than ever is focused and obsessed with results, embraces innovation, engages in powerful and influential partnerships, and drives large-scale mobilization of people. We will put our efforts behind ambitious goals that will make a difference on a global scale, building on our solid foundation of conservation successes achieved over more than half a century, while leveraging our unique worldwide Network of locally rooted national organizations, our successful partnerships and collaborative projects, and the values and passion of our people. There has never been a more exciting or challenging time for WWF or indeed for the entire environmental movement. This is a unique opportunity to rebalance our relationship with the planet. It's an opportunity we have to take.  WWF: TAKING BOLD COLLECTIVE ACTION WWF has embarked on a journey of deep internal transformation that will make us stronger and more effective as we tackle the challenges and capitalize on the opportunities that lie ahead. The time to act is now. We are putting in place a global conservation strategy that reflects the way the world is changing, meets the big environmental challenges of the age and helps us simplify, unite and focus our efforts for greater impact. We will continue to deliver locally in crucial ecoregions around the world, but sharpen our focus on six global goals ­ on wildlife, forests, oceans, water, climate and energy, and food ­ and three key drivers of environmental degradation ­ markets, finance and governance. We are creating global communities of practice for each of the goals and drivers composed of specialists from WWF and key external partners. This will foster greater collaboration and innovation, incubating new ideas and taking promising ones to scale, as we unite our efforts toward making ambitious targets a reality. While continuing to focus on action and impact on the ground, we must think at the level of systems and devote our efforts to working with and influencing the institutions and corporations that matter in moving policy and practice toward sustainability. This will demand impact on the drivers of change at a scale that is beyond our current best efforts. We know that one organization alone can't effect the change needed. That's why the Practices are strongly inclusive of our partnerships with local and global institutions and corporations. The changes we want to see in the world can only come about through the efforts of many actors: local communities and multinational corporations, governments and NGOs, finance institutions and development agencies, consumers and researchers. Through powerful    coalitions we will strive to accelerate the change we need to build a sustainable future. That means strongly embracing and investing in our and others' most effective solutions to the crucial challenges facing the planet. And we must mobilize hundreds of millions from all corners of the world, to join forces and make their voices heard for a better future. We have reached a fork in the road. This generation has a huge opportunity to build a sustainable future for all, and momentum is on our side. But the situation could still go either way. There has never been a stronger sense of urgency for action. In WWF we are defining new ways of working to make a difference at a scale that matters. We know we must redefine humanity's relationship with the planet. We passionately believe we can. And we will.  OUR THEORY OF CHANGE  BETTER CHOICES FROM A ONE PLANET PERSPECTIVE  REDIRECT FINANCIAL FLOWS  PRESERVE NATURAL CAPITAL PRODUCE BETTER CONSUME MORE WISELY  EQUITABLE RESOURCE GOVERNANCE  ECOSYSTEM INTEGRITY  BIODIVERSITY CONSERVATION  FOOD, WATER AND ENERGY SECURITY  FORESTS OCEANS WILDLIFE FOOD CLIIMATE AND ENERGY WATER  HOW WE MAKE IT HAPPEN 6 global goals, 3 cross-cutting drivers, delivered by powerful communities of practice and partners MARKETS FINANCE GOVERNANCE   OUR UNIQUE NETWORK AND AMBITIONS* MARKETS "2015 was a watershed year, and the private sector plays a pivotal role in mobilizing the decisions, the resources and the finance to drive change." Carter Roberts President and CEO WWF-US  "I want to see the WWF Network coming together more closely than ever, acting locally to deliver global goals." Marco Lambertini Director General WWF International  GOVERNANCE "We need better governance of the world's biodiversity and natural resources that ensures they are managed sustainably and equitably." Andreas Lehnhoff Director WWF-Central Ameria  FOOD "We must tackle food from a whole systems approach from food production and its impacts on ecosystems and biodiversity, consumption patterns and unnecessary food waste." Mary Lou Higgins Director WWF-Colombia  FINANCE "We must push for investments in a sustainable future while deterring those contributing to destructive activities and actions." David Nussbaum CEO WWF-UK   WILDLIFE "Biodiversity is the foundation of ecosystems. We must work both on the ground and on the global factors to arrest its sharp decline."  OCEANS "We are determined to bring the expertise of our ocean and fishery specialists to turn the tide on the crisis of the world's oceans." Johan van de Gronden Director General WWF-Netherlands  Eberhard Brandes CEO WWF-Germany  CLIMATE AND ENERGY "The Paris climate agreement is just the beginning of a roadmap to end the fossil fuel era."  WATER "We need to move beyond simply adopting better water efficiency practices and become true water stewards."  Sze Ping Lo CEO WWF-China  FORESTS "We must maintain and enhance the integrity of the world's key forests, for biodiversity and the benefits that they bring to people."  SHARED GLOBAL GOALS  Our work is closely aligned with global development priorities. There are strong synergies between WWF's global goals and the Sustainable Development Goals: some of the most significant are shown below. Specific targets under each goal reflect WWF priorities even more closely, while our lobbying helped ensure the environment is a "green thread" running throughout.  WWF GLOBAL GOALS DRIVERS  CLIMATE AND ENERGY A low-carbon, climate-resilient future OCEANS Productive and resilient ocean ecosystems improving livelihoods WILDLIFE Species secured and recovering in the wild FORESTS Forests and their benefits to human well-being enhanced and maintained WATER Water for people and nature FOOD Sustainable food systems MARKETS Shift to sustainable production and consumption FINANCE Increase in public/private financing for sustainable development GOVERNANCE Robust governance and policy in support of priority objectives   PRIORITY PLACES  As we pursue our global goals, we'll continue to focus our efforts on the most important places for conservation. Our 35 priority places are home to irreplaceable and threatened biodiversity and unique ecosystems.   OUR PRIORITIES   From Armenia to Zimbabwe, our staff are coming together to pursue global goals. Across six continents, six conservation priorities unite us.   CLIMATE AND ENERGY A GLOBAL SHIFT TOWARD A LOW-CARBON AND CLIMATE-RESILIENT FUTURE IS ACHIEVED Combating climate change requires a rapid shift away from fossil fuels toward clean energy: a record-breaking US$367 billion was invested in renewable energy globally in 2015.   In Paris in December, 195 countries signed up to an unprecedented global agreement to combat climate change -- the culmination of years of advocacy work by WWF and others through the United Nations climate change process. 1.5°C The Paris Agreement promises efforts to limit average global temperature increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels. We were one of the first organizations to advocate this more ambitious target and were delighted that it was included in the final agreement. While current government pledges fall well short of what's needed to stay below 1.5°C, cities and businesses are beginning to pick up the slack. 1,000 cities committed to 100 per cent renewable energy and/or to 80 per cent greenhouse gas reductions by 2050, while more than 100 major businesses promised emissions reductions in line with science, as part of the WWF-supported Science-Based Targets Initiative.   2009 The Copenhagen conference ends in disappointment as governments fail to reach a new climate deal.   Countries will come back to the table to review and update their commitments in line with the 1.5-2°C goal. 20Emissions need to peak by this date for a reasonable chance of keeping below 1.5°C of warming. All countries must submit long-term low-emission development strategies and new or updated climate change targets for 2030. 2020 Current emissions targets for 2030 are 35 per cent too high, so they urgently need to be strengthened. 20WWF and many others are calling for 100 per cent renewable energy by 2050 with fossil fuel use completely phased out in a just transition. 202013 At the climate talks in Warsaw, frustrated by the lack of progress and the influence of polluting industries, WWF and other civil society organizations walk out in protest.  20All countries sign up to a global climate deal that aims to limit temperature rise to well below 2°C, while pursuing efforts to keep below 1.5°C; 186 countries submit voluntary climate action plans to the UN. The Paris Agreement incorporates several key WWF priorities: EMISSIONS Greenhouse-gas emissions should peak "as soon as possible". All countries are called upon to develop long-term low-emission development plans and to update their climate change efforts every five years in line with the latest science, while an action platform is established to bring forward urgent action. FINANCE In addition to rich government providing US$100 billion a year in climate finance by 2020, all have to ensure systemic change by "shifting the trillions"; they have to also finance the energy transition, protect forests and other ecosystems, and support the most vulnerable. CLIMATE CHANGE IMPACTS A Global Goal on Adaptation seeks to strengthen resilience and reduce vulnerability to climate change, while a standalone article on Loss and Damage helps to safeguard vulnerable people and ecosystems when adaptation is not possible. ECOSYSTEMS The text highlighted the importance of ecosystems, including ­ for the first time ­ the ocean, in climate mitigation and adaptation, and loss and damage from the impacts of climate change.   OCEANS THE WORLD'S MOST IMPORTANT FISHERIES AND OCEAN ECOSYSTEMS ARE PRODUCTIVE AND RESILIENT, AND IMPROVE LIVELIHOODS AND BIODIVERSITY Belizean kids show off their grandfather's catch. 17,000 people working in the Belize fisheries industry use the income to support their families.   US$2.5 TRILLION Our report Reviving the Ocean Economy helped spur international commitments to protect the ocean. The research showed that, if the ocean were a country, it would be the world's seventh largest economy, with a monetary value of at least US$2.5 trillion a year -- but this value will fall without strong action to stop the erosion of its underpinning assets. Leaders and influencers used our analysis prominently during 2015. -49% This year's special marine edition of the Living Planet Report highlighted the shocking decline in marine species. Populations of marine vertebrates have fallen by almost half since 1970, with some of the most important fish species for regional economies, food and livelihoods declining even more. The report raised the profile of vital ocean conservation issues. GOAL 14 In September, all governments committed to "Conserve and sustainably use the oceans, sea and marine resources" as one of the 17 UN Sustainable Development Goals; a historic outcome. The ocean also featured in the Paris climate agreement.   In 2015, our global marine campaign put the future of the ocean in the spotlight. Around the world, WWF is helping to turn the tide.  10 MILLION A DAY The ocean was a big story in 2015, reaching up to 10 million people a day during major launches: the reach on Facebook was about 4.6 million and other social media channels also featured strongly. Our reports received over 1,700 media hits across 76 countries in 32 languages in top outlets including Al Jazeera, BBC, CNN, The Hindu, Xinhua, Deutsche Welle, Reuters, The Bangkok Post and many more. The potential collective reach was over a billion people. But it wasn't just about the numbers; the campaign messages were consistently referenced by global opinion-shapers like the World Economic Forum and The Economist, by the leadership of the influential Small Island Developing States bloc, and leaders from the US and the EU, among others. 10 GOVERNMENTS After two years of hard work by WWF and partners, the 10 parties to the Nairobi Convention have agreed to develop a new integrated management approach in the Northern Mozambique Channel ­ a rich marine area that's vital for the livelihoods and food security of 10 million people, but faces threats from oil and gas exploitation, unsustainable and illegal fishing, and destructive development.    Protecting 30 per cent of marine and coastal areas could generate US$490-920 billion and 150,000-180,000 full-time jobs between now and 2050, according to research we published last year. Globally, marine protected areas cover only about 4 per cent of the ocean, but this is growing: 2015 brought significant advances, with countries including Madagascar, Malaysia, New Zealand, Chile, the United States and the Pacific island nation of Kiribati announcing major new protection for waters under their jurisdiction. Our campaign aimed to further boost this coverage by showing how investment in ocean protection pays high dividends to people, nature and economies.  543,723 PEOPLE FOR THE REEF Australia's Great Barrier Reef has been spared from the threat of huge volumes of dredge spoil being dumped within its waters. Australia committed to introduce a permanent ban on dumping, following a global WWF campaign including a petition which attracted 543,723 supporters. The World Heritage Committee has put the Australian government on "probation" until the health of the reef improves, while a number of banks have backed out of financing new coal terminals near the reef.   WILDLIFE THE WORLD'S MOST ICONIC AND THREATENED SPECIES ARE SECURED AND RECOVERING IN THE WILD African elephant dust bathing in Amboseli National Park, Kenya. The illegal ivory trade remains a major threat to Africa's elephants.   +17% In February, the Chinese government announced a 17 per cent rise in the giant panda population over the last decade. Meanwhile, wild tigers are on the rise for the first time in 100 years. The global total was revised up to 3,890 from as few as 3,200 in 2010 due to improved monitoring and population increases in India, Russia, Nepal and Bhutan. Asia's greater one-horned rhino numbers also rose to more than 3,500. FIRST In July, all 193 member states adopted the first-ever UN General Assembly resolution against wildlife crime. WWF played a key role, and the final text incorporated all our major asks. Despite another terrible year for poaching of African elephants and rhinos, there were signs of progress on the ground, with Nepal celebrating its third year since 2011 of zero poaching of rhinos. 1.3 MILLION Our campaign to reduce demand for ivory in Thailand garnered the support of 1.3 million Thais and the backing of celebrities, artists and government officials. It coincided with the government regulating the domestic ivory market for the first time. Meanwhile, the Chinese and US presidents announced plans to phase out their domestic ivory markets, as did the chief executive of Hong Kong following a WWF campaign backed by over 70,000 people.   FORESTS THE INTEGRITY OF THE WORLD'S MOST IMPORTANT FORESTS, INCLUDING THEIR BENEFITS TO HUMAN WELL-BEING, IS ENHANCED AND MAINTAINED A misty morning in Kika, Cameroon. The Congo Basin holds the second-largest rainforest in the world, but millions of hectares will be destroyed over the next 15 years without urgent action to protect and manage forest landscapes sustainably.   11 DEFORESTATION FRONTS Just 11 places account for more than 80 per cent of projected deforestation up to 2030 ­ a total of more than 180 million hectares ­ according to research collected in our Living Forests Report. 99% The Amazon Region Protected Areas (ARPA) Programme, which aims to protect and sustainably manage 60 million hectares of the Brazilian Amazon, has reached almost 99 per cent of its target with the inclusion of six new protected areas. We worked with the government of Brazil and other partners including the World Bank, GEF and German Development Bank to launch ARPA in 2002. FORESTS AND CLIMATE The Paris climate agreement echoed WWF's position by highlighting the importance of ending deforestation, with tropical forest countries, donor countries, private sector companies and civil society promising new efforts to conserve and restore forests and the carbon they contain.   WATER FRESHWATER ECOSYSTEMS AND FLOW REGIMES IN KEY RIVER BASINS PROVIDE WATER FOR PEOPLE AND NATURE A fisherman casts his net in the shallow lakes of the Várzea, a seasonal floodplain forest in the Brazilian Amazon. Wetlands and freshwater ecosystems provide food, clean water and other vital services that people and nature depend on.   20 MILLION HECTARES At the Ramsar conference in June, the governments of Bolivia, Brazil and Paraguay made a joint commitment to conserve and sustainably manage the Pantanal, the world's largest wetland. The 20-million hectare ecosystem -- almost the size of Great Britain ­ is a priority for WWF. 120,000 + Companies and financial institutions have used our Water Risk Filter to assess more than 120,000 facilities in river basins all over the world. The tool, newly updated in 2015 to cover all industries and more than 120 commodities, enables users to easily understand their specific water risks and take action to mitigate them (waterriskfilter.org). 10 The International Hydropower Association outlined 10 commitments to make the industry more sustainable. This included calling on the industry to use the Hydropower Sustainability Assessment Protocol, which WWF helped develop. Using the tool will minimize the negative impacts of dams on communities and freshwater ecosystems.   FOOD SUSTAINABLE FOOD SYSTEMS CONSERVE NATURE AND MAINTAIN FOOD SECURITY A field ready for planting sugarcane in Queensland, Australia. WWF has been working with cane farmers in the region to reduce the run-off of water and chemicals onto the Great Barrier Reef.   9 BILLION By 2050, more than 9 billion people will share the planet, and the UN's Food and Agriculture Organization forecasts that demand for food could increase by up to 70 per cent. The way we produce our food has a huge impact on the natural world, and is a leading driver of deforestation, water scarcity, climate change and biodiversity loss. 20% A fifth of all palm oil is now certified to the standards of the Roundtable on Sustainable Palm Oil (RSPO), meaning it doesn't contribute to deforestation. The RSPO is one of several certification schemes WWF has helped set up to promote sustainable food commodities. Others include the Marine Stewardship Council, the Aquaculture Stewardship Council, the Round Table on Sustainable Soy and Bonsucro for sugarcane. 30% Livestock production has a huge impact on the planet, occupying around 30 per cent of all land and emitting 18 per cent of global greenhouse gases. We're promoting responsible production and changes in consumption of beef and dairy products. One recent success was the approval of principles and criteria for the Global Roundtable on Sustainable Beef.   PARTNERSHIPS   What we do is only possible thanks to the support of many partners in the public sector, private sector and civil society, including our donors and those who campaign and act with us. We're grateful to all those who have worked with us over the past year.   PUBLIC SECTOR PARTNERSHIPS  During 2015, all nations on Earth committed to a shared agenda for sustainable development and action on climate change. The commitment and leadership of WWF's public sector partners have been crucial. Now the focus is on bringing together governments, development partners, private sector and civil society to build partnerships, develop solutions and turn commitments into reality.  "We will advance fully towards an equitable global economic system in which no country or person is left behind, enabling decent work and productive livelihoods for all, while preserving the planet for our children and future generations." ­ From the Addis Ababa Action Agenda, adopted by the world's governments on 15 July 2015, which will guide public finance, trade and private investment toward sustainable development. WWF was closely involved in the process, and we were pleased to see our environmental priorities figured highly. "The Addis Ababa Action Agenda is a significant achievement toward financing a sustainable development agenda in a holistic manner, one that recognizes the connection between economic prosperity, social development and environmental protection," said Céline Beaulieu, WWF's Head of Delegation at the conference. "This is an important step forward in securing the resources needed to eradicate poverty and help countries develop sustainably. Ultimately, success will be determined by mobilization by all toward action and implementation."  Partnerships  Following the Addis Ababa conference, governments endorsed the Post-2015 Agenda and Sustainable Development Goals in September, and reconvened to reach an accord on climate change in Paris in December. We'll work with our public sector partners to influence national plans and budgets to implement these goals, and set clear and measurable targets that can mobilize the billions required to leverage further trillions of capital investment toward sustainable, low-carbon and resilient development.  "Resilient economies can only be created by supporting people and ecosystems through a change in mindset. New finance for development and climate must be delivered transparently. Funding mechanisms need to prioritize low-carbon, climate-resilient and environmentally sound development solutions that respect human rights." Tim Geer, Director, Public Sector Partnerships WWF International   TOGETHER WITH BUSINESS  Business has a huge impact on the natural world ­ but also has the potential to be a major part of the solution. Only by engaging with responsible business we can tackle issues like climate change, water scarcity, overfishing and deforestation.  Key areas we work on: Better production and responsible sourcing of raw materials Renewable energy Water stewardship Influencing public policy Equitable sharing of natural resources  Redirecting financial flows to support conservation  Raising awareness of the need to consume more wisely  Protecting special places   Transparency around who we work with is important to WWF. We publish an annual Global Corporate Partnerships Report on our largest international partnerships, and report on an office basis on our local/national partnerships. Jointly, these tell the story of all our partnerships with companies, large or small. Please see    Partnerships  CLIMATE CHANGE Our corporate partners have already made significant cuts in their greenhouse-gas emissions, and have made bold commitments to embrace renewable energy and cut emissions on an unprecedented scale. Business leaders were among the strongest voices urging governments to agree an ambitious climate deal. Among the many announcements made by leading companies as part of WWF-backed initiatives during the Paris conference:   COMMODITIES Unsustainable production of commodities like palm oil, paper, soy and seafood drives deforestation, water scarcity, biodiversity loss, climate change and other threats to the natural world. But a relatively small number of companies have it in their power to transform global markets and make sustainable production the norm. Of our "top 100" priority companies:  66 have made credible, time-bound commitments to source at least one key certified sustainable commodity. 76 are members of a multi-stakeholder roundtable, which is a first step toward sustainable sourcing. 25 have strategic partnerships with WWF that aim to transform their supply chain.  WATER STEWARDSHIP Water stewardship is about committing to sustainable management of shared water resources in the public interest. We support our business partners to progressively improve their water use, reduce their water-related impacts and take collective action to secure freshwater supplies for people and nature.  1 The World Economic Forum ranks water crises as the number 1 risk to business for the next 10 years. 130 WWF has 130 corporate partners working on freshwater issues ­ our fastest growing conservation topic.  7 Last year we engaged with seven global industry associations and many other multilateral organizations on water issues.    OUR DONORS  US$100 million raised thanks to the commitment and generosity of our many partners and donors. We are delighted to announce that we have reached our fundraising target of US$100 million for our Campaign for a Living Planet. Over the past five years, this campaign has been our worldwide call to action to protect the planet's most remarkable species and places and tackle humanity's footprint on Earth. We are grateful to all of our donors ­ from individuals to foundations to corporate partners ­ who have supported the campaign and are helping us build a future in which people live in harmony with nature. As ever we are thankful for the inspiring leadership and support of the chair of the Campaign for a Living Planet Steering Committee, André Hoffmann, and to other committee members for their active involvement. Together, our efforts have been rewarded with this inspirational sum raised. WWF International has four levels of partnership and engagement: the Honorary Circle, Conservation Leaders, Conservation Champions and Conservation Partners. We would like to thank and recognize all of our donors who have provided leadership and generous funding support for our conservation work.  Honorary Circle We thank the Hoffmann family who, through the MAVA Foundation, have generously supported many global programmes, such as our marine, climate, protected areas and freshwater work, specifically in the Mediterranean, Greater Mekong, China, Mongolia, Europe and West Africa. MAVA has also supported the development of our core fundraising team and the closing stages of our Campaign for a Living Planet, and renewed their support for the Luc Hoffmann Institute. Miel de Botton provides ongoing support to our Campaign for a Living Planet Leadership Fund as well as WWF's marine work and our global climate and policy work, with a particular focus on China. Nomis Stiftung has generously supported the Luc Hoffmann Institute's LIVES project, which is conducting basic research to develop riskanalysis metrics for complex systems involving food, energy, water and the economy. A fullscale pilot project for this innovative approach is currently being tested in the Mekong river basin in Cambodia. Kristian Parker and Oak Foundation is a critical funder of our global campaign to secure some of the planet's most treasured places by eliminating or transforming threats to World Heritage sites and the communities that depend on them. Oak Foundation also continues its longstanding commitment to our youth volunteer programme Explore! Through Fondation Segré, Dr Claudio Segré has generously supported WWF and TRAFFIC's global action plan against poaching and illegal wildlife trade to enhance protection for threatened species, address demand reduction and elevate the profile of wildlife crime at the highest levels. Fondation Segré is also supporting WWF to implement an ambitious model of  marine protected area management in Indonesia and the Philippines to address the loss of marine biodiversity, enhance food security and reverse the declining food sources and livelihoods in the Coral Triangle. Pierrette Schlettwein continues to generously support WWF and TRAFFIC's work to combat wildlife crime by tackling poaching, stopping illegal trafficking and reducing demand for wildlife products to secure a future for endangered species. One Honorary Circle member who wishes to remain anonymous continues to generously support our Tigers Alive Initiative. Throughout  the Terai Arc landscape in India and Nepal we have managed to increase protection in some priority tiger sites. Together we aim to create the largest connected tiger population in the world and ensure the Conservation Assured Tiger Standard (CA/TS) is adopted worldwide and wild tigers double by 2022. Another Honorary Circle member who prefers to remain anonymous has provided WWF with the core funding to develop and grow the Living Himalayas Initiative to conserve the rich biodiversity and sensitive mountain landscapes across Bhutan, India and Nepal.  Conservation Leaders We are very grateful for the generous support of our Conservation Leaders, who help us achieve conservation impact through funding their programmes of interest, and who also reach out to their personal, business and philanthropic networks to increase awareness of WWF's work.  TO BE UPDATED With as few as 4,000 snow leopards left, we launched our first global action plan for the endangered species in 2015. In Mongolia, WWF teams collared four of the elusive big cats, while in India we provided livestock pens to farmers to reduce humanleopard conflict and retaliatory killings.   TOGETHER WITH PEOPLE  WWF connects with millions of people all over the world. Whether through reports and stories in the media, or web campaigns and Twitter hashtags, we raise awareness and interest around the issues that matter for the planet, and inspire people to act. Their support makes our voice powerful and our work possible.  INSPIRE EARTH HOUR Earth Hour, the world's largest grassroots movement for the environment, went from strength to strength to shine a light on climate action. Millions of people across seven continents, and even the crew aboard the International Space Station, turned out their lights for an hour in a show of solidarity to tackle our planet's biggest environmental challenge yet ­ climate change. Many individuals, governments, cities, businesses, schools and institutions went further, supporting local campaigns, fundraising initiatives and actions initiated by WWF teams to change climate change.  NEWS  WWF was featured in more than 70,000 media stories worldwide.  WAVES OF SUPPORT Our global ocean campaign really took off on digital media. We reached 500,000 people each day on average and up to 10 million a day during major launches. Influential institutions and leaders consistently promoted our ocean infographics and messages ­ there were more than 53,000 mentions on Twitter alone.  ENDANGERED EMOJI Emoji is becoming a universal language, used millions of times every day. In May we launched a unique emoji-based campaign after discovering that 17 characters in the emoji alphabet represent endangered species. Twitter users who signed up to the #EndangeredEmoji campaign made a small donation each time they used one of the endangered emoji in a Tweet. As well as raising funds, it was a fun and simple way of taking our message to a new audience. 62,900 sign-ups 815,000 mentions  #CHANGECLIMATECHANGE We helped bring the voice of the people to the Paris climate talks. Our Tweet Your Leader campaign enabled people from any country to send a Tweet directly to their head of government, urging action on climate change. 800 million impressions for the campaign hashtag #ChangeClimateChange   The Rufiji River runs through Tanzania's Selous Game Reserve, one of the world's largest wildlife sanctuaries. This World Heritage site is threatened by more than 50 oil, gas and mining concessions as well as hydropower and infrastructure development. During 2016, we're campaigning for stronger support for natural World Heritage sites, which make a crucial contribution to sustainable development.    WWF Network Total WWF Network income increased by 5 per cent, with an increase of EUR35 million to EUR692 million. Expenditure grew by 7 per cent (EUR46 million), mainly due to increased spending in conservation programmes (up 9 per cent). The resulting surplus of EUR18 million will be used to fund our ongoing projects and programmes, and help us to reach our conservation targets. The figures given show total WWF Network income and expenditure but do not represent consolidated accounts. The Network includes WWF International, Programme Offices and National Organizations.   