REPORT 20THIS REPORT HAS BEEN PRODUCED IN COLLABORATION WITH  Critical materials for the transition to a 100% sustainable energy future    Executive summary  This study examines whether non-energy raw material supply bottlenecks could occur in the transition to a fully sustainable energy system. Such a transition is represented in The Energy Report, published in 2011 by WWF and Ecofys, which shows a way to almost 100% renewable energy by 2050 coupled with strong energy efficiency efforts in all sectors.  The most critical supply bottlenecks of non-energy raw materials are lithium and cobalt, which are used for batteries in electric vehicles. These bottlenecks can be alleviated by recycling lithium, substituting lithium in other sectors, and by using less cobalt-intensive cathodes. By contrast indium, gallium and tellurium are not expected to become important bottlenecks. Their use in solar power (photovoltaics) can be substituted by applying technologies requiring less critical materials, such as silicon. The use of indium and gallium for energy efficient lighting is very small compared to production in 2011. Supply bottlenecks are likely to pose less of a problem also for copper, which is used for transition grids and increasingly for more capture wind and solar energy and in energy efficient motors.  The authors of this study used the following approaches: A quick scan was carried out to identify areas where bottlenecks might occur. These bottlenecks were further analysed by taking information from The Energy Report, such as the installed electric capacity, amount of vehicles or building area, and multiplying this with the material intensity of the different technologies, such as the amount of tellurium per GW installed capacity of photovoltaics. These calculations resulted in the maximum material demand for a technology, both on a yearly basis as well as cumulative for the period 2012 to 2050. The maximum material demand per year was compared with the production of that material in 2011. The cumulative demand for the material was compared with the reserves and the resources of that material. Ways of mitigating material scarcities were also investigated.  So-called `rare earths', including neodymium and yttrium, and which are needed for wind turbines, are expected to exceed the demand. However, rare earths are nevertheless considered a bottleneck for other, geopolitical reasons. The majority of current production is concentrated in a single country, China. In recent years, rare earths have been the subject of export restrictions, which have given rise to concerns in, for instance, Japan, the United States and Europe. Eliminating these geopolitical constraints in the short term is difficult, but is possible in the longer term as resources become available in other geographical areas as well.  This study concludes that although the scenario in The Energy Report leads to additional material demand for specific applications, there are also significant material savings related to the high energy and material efficiency pathways chosen for these scenarios. As a result, the overall impact on scarce resources in a highly renewable powered and energy-efficient world is likely to be substantially smaller than in a scenario with more modest sustainable energy ambitions. However, new political legislation in all major economies to promote material recycling and drive substantial technological development is still required to increase material efficiency.    Foreword About 3 years ago, WWF launched its energy vision to arrive at a 100% renewable energy powered economy by 2050.  Global politics permitting we know that sustainable renewable energy can fuel the world reliably while overcoming threats of climate change, air pollution and high economic costs for the majority of countries from increased import costs of fossil fuels. While a vision for a fossil fuel and nuclear free global energy supply by 2050 is environmentally sound and a key condition to stay well below 2 degree global warming, reduce nuclear risks and substantially diminish air pollution which still kills more than 3 million people annually and mostly in developing countries, such a vision seems to imply that clean renewables have no limits and resource constraints.  Dr Stephan Singer, Director Global Energy Policy, WWF International  It is true that the simple amount of clean energy from sun, wind and geothermal alone can power our global energy demand by more than 100 times. It is, however, not true that the overall renewable energy supply chain and conversion technologies have no limits. We need more grids, more transformers, more batteries, simply more materials, new specialised materials, more rare earth materials, copper, lithium etc. for highly innovative and modern energy technologies that provide a close to zeroemission energy sector. But we also know that mining of materials has a footprint in nature, creates waste, consumes fresh water, and that often practices of these non-energy minerals mined are highly dangerous and extremely polluting in some developing countries. In addition, some of these minerals are limited and not highly concentrated in the Earth crust.  Modern, innovative energy-related technologies often have a high demand for these materials. And they do not stand alone. Modern information technology sectors from computers to TV flat screens and mobile phones, various industrial applications and processes, lighting technologies and transport applications also increasingly require these materials.  For a long-term 100% renewable energy vision powered by modern technologies and assuming substantive growth and demand for all kind of other industrial technologies worldwide, and particular in developing countries, we need to make sure that there are no bottlenecks. Already some authorities and institutions warn of shortages of some rare earth materials before 2020. Though geologically we may not run out of rare earths that easily and that fast, 90% of worldwide production of these materials is presently concentrated in China. And in some cases, such as lithium for electric car drives and batteries, we may see shortages as this report by Ecofys documents.  Hence, a strong focus on energy efficiency and conservation is paramount to reduce non-energy material needs for the emerging renewable energy technologies worldwide. Also, WWF strongly urges all governments to legislate as soon as possible strong incentives and create regulations for enhanced recycling and reuse of precious and rare materials. In parallel, research and development shall be fostered for new materials and high material efficiency. This will not only provide a sufficient flow for materials for highly-innovative technologies and applications both in energy and non-energy usage, but also reduce overall environmental and social impacts of mining non-renewable resources.  Page 2 | Critical Materials for the Transition to a 100% Sustainable Energy Future   We are happy to see the evidence in this Ecofys report that a transition to a 100% sustainable energy supply is possible, in spite of supply chain bottlenecks, which can be mitigated through increased recycling and substitution. Stephan Singer, January 20 Lithium being extracted from ore. The demand for lithium, a major component in batteries for cell phones, laptops and electric vehicles, is expected to increase rapidly and is widely regarded as a key bottleneck for the large scale introduction of electric vehicles.   There are increasing concerns about the future availability Introduction of mined and non-renewable minerals and materials for our society. This concern focuses especially on rare earth metals, but also includes more common metals such as copper and aluminium. The upcoming material requirements for sustainable energy technologies is crucial in the debate, though non-energy material needs such as for IT and highly specialised manufacturing and modern transport industries also claim an ever larger share of these extractive non-renewable minerals. The development of a fully sustainable energy system will definitely lead to a change of material demands compared to a business-as-usual development of the conventional energy system. However, and strongly depending on overall successes in material, resource and energy efficiency, it remains to be seen whether the entire package of technologies belonging to a 100% sustainable renewable energy scenario actually leads to a higher net resource demand. This study investigates what material supply bottlenecks may occur in a transition to a 100% sustainable energy system, and how these bottlenecks can be overcome. It bases its calculations on the 100% sustainable energy scenario presented in The Energy Report (TER), a study produced by WWF and Ecofys in 2011. The critical materials report is divided up into five chapters.  Chapter 1 is this introduction.  Chapter 2 provides an overview of material production worldwide and a quick scan of materials for which supply bottlenecks may occur in future.  Chapter 3 describes which critical materials impact on which sustainable energy production technologies utilised in The Energy Report.  Chapter 4 provides a detailed assessment of ten critical material bottlenecks for TER, including proposed mitigation measures.  Chapter 5 compares the material demand related to The Energy Report scenario with a business as usual scenario from the International Energy Agency (IEA).   2.Supply Bottlenecks for Material Resources Worldwide    Supply This chapter contains an overview of non-biomass, non-renewable Bottlenecks mineral material production worldwide and a quick scan of materials for which supply for Material bottlenecks may occur in future. Biotic resources, such as fish and timber, and fuel resources, such Resources as coal and oil, are excluded from this analysis. Included are metals, such as copper (Cu), platinum Worldwide (Pt) and rare earth elements, and industrial minerals such as barite (BaSO4) and fluorspar (CaF2). Materials production, resource and reserves worldwide This chapter considers current materials production, resources and reserves worldwide. In resource accounting, the distinction between reserves and resources is important:  `Resources' are everything that is known and expected to exist somewhere. They are defined as materials of economic interest for extraction, which either now or in the future become commercially available (EU, 2010. USGS, 2012).  `Reserves' are everything for which there is reasonable certainty about where they are located. They are defined as "a subset of resources which are fully geologically evaluated and which can be economically, legally and immediately extracted; reserves are often described as the `working inventory' of a mining company, which is continually updated according to changing economic, technological, legal and political situations" (EU, 2010. USGS, 2012). In general, these definitions are almost identical to those used with fossil fuels. High commodity prices increase the reserve base while lower ones reduce its size. While production figures are generally available, estimating reserves and resources on a global scale involves some uncertainty. Information about materials of strategic importance (e.g. radioactive materials, materials used in weapons production) is often not publically available. In addition, production figures of some of the rarer materials (e.g. many of the rare earth elements) are not always readily available since these materials are often traded directly via long term delivery contracts rather than on the open global market. Further detail is provided in chapter 3 on how these uncertainties should be taken into account when analysing critical materials. Page 8 | Critical Materials for the Transition to a 100% Sustainable Energy Future   We distinguish the group of rare earths and the specific group of platinum group metals (PGMs). These groups consist of respectively seventeen and six different metals. Rare earths are: scandium (Sc), yttrium (Y), lanthanum (La), cerium (Ce), praseodymium (Pr), neodymium (Nd), promethium (Pm), samarium (Sm), europium (Eu), gadolinium (Gd), terbium (Tb), dysprosium (Dy), holmium (Ho), erbium (Er) and thulium (Tm). Platinum group metals are: platinum (Pt), osmium (Os), iridium (Ir), ruthenium (Ru), rhodium (Rh) and palladium (Pd). Each is often grouped together because they are generally mined and processed as a group.  As can be seen in Table 1, many of the materials currently in demand worldwide are not considered to have near or long term supply bottlenecks. Many resources are available for over 100 years, sometimes even over 1000 years. There are a few exceptions. Zirconium (Zr) and molybdenum (Mo) resources are only expected to last for respectively 43 and 56 years at current production levels. Reserves are clearly more constrained than resources, sometimes down to only 20 years. Notably low reserves to production ratios are present for antimony (Sb), strontium (Sr), gold (Au), lead (Pb) and tin (Sn), which are each below 20 years. Note that the reserves to production and resources to production ratios are not always good indicators for the likelihood of a supply chain bottleneck, as they only are relevant for materials with a stable demand. With rapidly increasing demand, exhaustion may happen much earlier. On the other hand, developments in reuse, recycling and substitution of critical metals can alleviate the exhaustion of materials. Materials judged to be vulnerable to supply bottlenecks, i.e. critical materials, will now be considered further. Molybdenum (Mo), a rare earth mineral, resources are only expected to last for 56 years at current production levels.   Materials which are vulnerable to supply bottlenecks The scarcity of a particular material and whether or not it can lead to a supply chain bottleneck depends on a lot of factors. First of all, the total amount of material and the part of this which is potentially recoverable. Secondly, the development of demand in the future and to which extent supply can be adjusted to meet changes in demand. This is also affected by the possibilities of recycling and substituting the material. Thirdly, the geological distribution of the material supply, which can lead to trade disruptions and supply risks. This last factor is up for debate. When the transition to a sustainable energy system is looked at from a global perspective, the distribution of the material over individual countries is not relevant and geopolitical factors do not play a role. This section considers which materials from Table 1 are vulnerable to supply bottlenecks. This is done by analysing six recent reports which identify critical materials for various sectors:  Ad-hoc Working Group on defining critical raw materials ­ Critical raw materials for the EU (2010). The Working Group has identified 14 critical materials at the EU level based on supply risk and economic importance. These include platinum group metals (PGMs) and the rare earths.  The Hague Centre for Strategic Studies ­ Scarcity of Minerals: A strategic security issue (2010). The HCSS has identified 15 individual elements, as well as the rare earths and PGMs, as critical materials using the following criteria: the importance of the metals for the high tech industrial sector, the limited availability of substitutes and the elements which are essential to emerging technologies and `green technologies' in particular.  Joint Research Centre Institute for Energy and Transport ­ Supply chain bottlenecks in the Strategic Energy Technology Plan (2010). This study identifies supply chain bottlenecks based on technologies included in the Strategic Energy Technology Plan, focusing on a wide range of renewable energy technologies, including wind power, onshore and offshore, solar photovoltaics (PV), concentrated solar power (CSP), carbon capture and storage (CCS), advanced biofuels, nuclear power generation, fuel cells and hydrogen in transport, solar thermal, electricity networks.  Joint Research Centre Institute for Energy and Transport ­ Critical Metals in Strategic Energy Technologies (2011). This study assesses 14 metals which are used in large quantities in technologies presented in the Strategic Energy Technology Plan, considering market and political factors to divide the metals into three groups: high risk, medium risk and low risk. For our analysis, Ecofys focuses on materials considered high and medium risk, with low risk metals considered where relevant to the deployment of renewable and energy efficient technologies.  APS Panel on Public Affairs & The Materials Research Society ­ Energy Critical Elements: Securing Materials for Emerging Technologies (2011). This report considers `energy-critical elements', which are defined as elements for which scarcity can significantly hamper the introduction of game-changing energy technologies, with energy-critical  elements grouped according to their usage. For the rare earths, specifically dysprosium (Dy), neodymium (Nd), praseodymium (Pr), samarium (Sm), gadolinium (Gd), europium (Eu), terbium (Tb) and yttrium (Y) are mentioned.  United Nations Environment Programme ­ Critical Metals for Future Sustainable Technologies and their Recycling Potential (2009). This report identifies critical metals for future sustainable technologies such as renewable energy production and energy efficiency technologies, based on demand growth, supply risks and recycling restrictions and classifying metals according to whether they will be critical on the short, medium or long term. Table 2 below shows the subset of materials from Table 1 which are identified in the six reports as vulnerable to supply bottlenecks. Some of the studies from Table 2 mention the platinum group metals as a group, while others mention them individually (platinum (Pt), palladium (Pd) and ruthenium (Ru)). The same holds for rare earths, which are mentioned as a group in some studies and as individual elements in others. The next chapter considers the implications of these critical metals for transitioning to a 100% sustainable energy system.    3. Critical Materials for Transitioning to a 100% Sustainable Energy System    Critical Materials This chapter for Transitioning to assesses which critical materials will impact on a 100% Sustainable the sustainable energy production technologies Energy System utilised in a fully sustainable energy system. This fully sustainable energy system is as represented in The Energy Report (TER) and identifies which material supply bottlenecks are recommended for more detailed analysis in the following chapter. In that chapter, a full analysis will be given of the expected material requirement for building a fully sustainable energy system. That material requirement will then be compared to the long-term availability of materials. The first part of this chapter describes the technologies from the TER and gives a general indication of their material requirements. The second part lists the most important bottlenecks, based on the technologies from the TER and information on critical materials. Critical materials for sustainable energy production technologies The six studies used to make the overview of critical metals in Chapter 2 each have their own basis for determining whether a material is critical or not. For this study, only the materials which might lead to a bottleneck for the TER scenario are of interest. The 100% renewable energy scenario which forms the basis for TER contains many different renewable energy supply technologies and energy efficiency technologies across the transport, built environment and industrial sectors. However, not all of these technologies are dependent on the materials identified in Chapter 2 and not all are vulnerable to materials supply bottlenecks.  Solar energy - Solar energy is an important consumer of critical materials. In the TER scenario, solar energy supplies half of our total electricity demand in 2050, half of our building heating and 15% of industrial heat and fuel. Solar energy can be subdivided into photovoltaics, concentrated solar power, lowtemperature heating and `concentrating solar heat'. Photovoltaics can be further subdivided into silicon-based crystalline cells and thin film cells. Especially for thin film cells photovoltaics, which require several types of scarce materials, solar energy is an important consumer of critical materials  bottlenecks can occur. In addition, a large increase in photovoltaics will cause an increase in demand for silver, tin and silicon.  Wind energy - If wind energy is deployed on a large scale, as is foreseen in the TER, it could become a significant consumer of critical materials, particularly for the production of permanent magnets for direct-drive solutions. An additional 1,000,000 onshore and 100,000 offshore wind turbines could meet a quarter of the world's electricity needs in 2050 (Ecofys, 2011). In addition to scarce materials, copper is also required for the transformers needed for the wind turbines. How a large scale increase in wind energy affects supply and demand of these materials, is elaborated upon further on in the report.  Wave and tidal energy - Wave and tidal energy, which make a relatively small contribution to the TER scenario, will not be significantly affected by a scarcity of critical materials, with the possible exception of copper for generators.  Hydropower - Hydropower is not anticipated to be significantly affected by critical material bottlenecks despite the use of copper, since the amount of copper required per MW electricity is relatively low due to the large scale of hydropower stations.  Geothermal power - Geothermal power requires copper for heat exchangers. Especially with the increase in installed capacity of geothermal power, this could affect future copper demand. However, no reliable quantitative data is available.  Efficiency in industry - Improving energy efficiency in the industrial sector includes a wide variety of measures (Ecofys, 2009). On the one hand this will involve integration of processes and process intensification, which will lead to a reduction in material usage. On the other hand, there will be add-on technologies, like heat exchangers and power speed control. Heat exchangers require materials with a large thermal conductivity, such as copper and aluminium. Power speed control equipment requires power semiconductors. In addition, lightweight and more durable alloys can improve the efficiency of machinery, such as motors and drives, making them useful for process improvements. For chemical processes, catalysts are important. Improvements in catalysts, which often include critical materials such as PGMs, can lead to energy efficiency improvements in industry. The materials used in catalysts, however, are so diverse, that not one specific critical material stands out. In addition, since their usage is already widespread in industry, the projected increase in demand for these materials due to additional energy efficiency measures in TER will not be exceptional. Finally, in comparison with other industrial energy efficiency improvements, catalysts are only a small aspect. New catalysts are not critical for achieving the TER scenario and will therefore not become a material bottleneck. With the exception of control equipment, which composes only a small part of efficiency improvements in industry, efficiency improvements in industry do not require critical materials.  Low carbon transport ­ Low carbon transport involves improving energy efficiency, fuel switching to biofuels and electric vehicles. Improving energy efficiency includes measures such as using lighter materials, improving aerodynamics and making more efficient engines. This requires lightweight materials such as carbon fibre and super alloys, which are stronger, lighter and    more durable than conventional alloys and require scarce materials such as molybdenum and tungsten. Switching from fossil fuels to electricity will see increased demand for materials to produce, for example, electrical engines, batteries, loading stations for fuels. High density energy storage devices, which are mainly batteries containing lithium or cobalt, will be required for electric vehicles.   Energy efficiency in the built environment - Energy efficiency in the built environment is dominated by two main measures: insulation and installations. · Insulation is of key importance in the TER. Heating and cooling of new buildings should require virtually no energy by 2030 and existing buildings should have energy demands for heating and cooling reduced by 60%. Most of the materials used for insulation, such as mineral wool and foam, do not require critical materials. · Installations include the energy-using infrastructure within buildings, including heat pumps, air conditioning and lighting. A heat pump contains a heat exchanger, which contains high conductivity materials such as copper and aluminum, as well as less common materials such as selenium and chromium. Energy efficient lighting consists of light-emitting diodes (LEDs) and fluorescent lamps, which require critical materials such as gallium, indium and rare earths. Energy efficient homes also make use of smart electronics which help save energy in households and offices, for example by turning off equipment that isn't used, regulating temperature and preventing the waste of food. These smart electronics contain semiconductors, which contain scarce materials such as indium and gallium. Scarce materials for semiconductors are discussed further on in this report.   Infrastructure - In order to switch to a 100% renewable energy scenario, the energy transport, distribution and storage infrastructure has to adapt to a more flexible, decentralised energy system. This will result in additional material demand, most notably copper for instance for the enlarged transmission grid infrastructure.  Semiconductors, which are used for a wide variety of purposes, are included in many applications in for instance the built environment and industry. Depending on their purpose, semiconductors are designed using different materials. Further on in the report, a brief assessment is included on whether materials for semiconductors can become a bottleneck for the implementation of a fully sustainable energy system as represented in The Energy Report (TER). Biomass is used in TER for specific purposes where no other renewable energy sources are available. An increased production of biomass will result in an increased demand of both organic and artificial fertilisers. The total amounts, however, may differ based on selection and use of crops, plant materials and their products, management practices, regions and technological progress as well as specific demand for biofuels. The three main components of artificial fertilisers are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. This study contains a concise assessment of whether the supply of these materials can become a bottleneck for the implementation of the TER scenario.  dentifying technologies that suffer from specific critical material bottlenecks is complex. In this study, Ecofys has drawn on a broad range of sources including the six studies listed in chapter 2, as well as scientific publications and Ecofys' informed expert opinion. Table 3 lists the critical materials identified for the TER technology sectors which are most likely to be affected by supply bottlenecks.  Critical materials bottlenecks for detailed assessment  copper is not critical for one particular technology but for the system as a whole  This section identifies critical materials bottlenecks for achieving a fully sustainable energy system as represented in The Energy Report (TER) that will be the focus of the more detailed analysis in the following chapter. These have been selected on the basis of:  the number of studies that emphasise the critical material for the technology  the expected quantities of the material required for the technologies, relative to other critical materials (informed expert judgement)  having representation across as many TER technologies that will be impacted by critical materials as possible. Using these selection criteria, the critical materials bottlenecks to be the focus of the detailed analysis are proposed to be:  tellurium, indium and gallium specifically for thin film photovoltaics and silver for photovoltaics · These first three critical materials are identified from literature review as the three critical materials of greatest importance for thin film photovoltaics. In addition, silver, which is used in several types of photovoltaics, is also expected to be critical.  indium and gallium for energy efficient lighting · Additional critical materials, such as rare earths, were identified for energy efficient lighting, however assessing two materials only will still allow for representation of the key issues and challenges associated with critical materials for this technology (and allow resources for this project to be deployed between a greater number of TER technologies). · Indium and gallium were selected as the two materials to analyse in more detail, but it would have been equally valid to have selected alternative materials.  rare earths, used for magnets in wind turbines, in particular neodymium and yttrium · Rare earths are one of the most important bottlenecks for wind turbines, being mentioned in almost all the studies on critical materials. · Other materials such as cobalt, manganese and molybdenum are also potential material bottlenecks for wind turbines.  Energy efficient lighting requires critical materials such as gallium, indium and rare earths   materials used in smart electronics in the built environment and power electronics in industry · Smart electronics and power electronics in the built environment and industry require semiconductors, which contain different types of scarce materials, depending on their purpose. Examples are arsenic, germanium, indium and gallium. Semiconductors are a complicated topic which requires further research. During this study, more information on materials required for semiconductors will be collected and where bottlenecks occur, these will be explained.  cobalt and lithium for high energy density batteries for electric transport · Demand for lithium, a major component in batteries for cell phones, laptops and electric vehicles, is expected to increase rapidly and is widely regarded as a key bottleneck for the large scale introduction of electric vehicles. · Cobalt is another important component of lithium ion batteries; it is also used for making super alloys and in wind turbines.  copper for electricity distribution and energy supply · Copper is a main component of electricity distribution networks and could become a bottleneck for developing the flexible, decentralised energy system required to realise the TER scenario. In addition, copper is used in many other renewable energy technologies such as wind and solar energy but also in transformers and motors. · It stands apart from the previously mentioned materials because it is not critical for one particular technology but for the system as a whole. A more detailed analysis on copper is presented further on in this report.  nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium for biomass · In the TER scenario, biomass is used where no other renewable energy sources are available. The enhanced production of biomass requires organic and artificial fertilizers, which have nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium as their main components. This study will contain a brief assessment on whether material bottlenecks will occur for biomass in the TER scenario.   4. Detailed Assessment of Bottleneck Areas    This chapter provides a detailed Detailed Assessment assessment of the potential bottleneck of Bottleneck Areas areas identified in the previous chapter. It calculates the maximum annual material demand and the cumulative material demand for each bottleneck to 2050 and then compares both these figures with the production, reserves and resources of the material in 2011.  As explained in chapter 2, the distinction between reserves and resources is:   29% 0f total electricity production is from photovoltaic energy   Reserves - are everything for which there is reasonable certainty about where they are located. They are defined as "a subset of resources which are fully geologically evaluated and which can be economically, legally and immediately extracted; reserves are often described as the `working inventory' of a mining company, which is continually updated according to changing economic, technological, legal and political situations" (EU, 2010. USGS, 2012). The basis for the calculations is the data from The Energy Report (TER). The sources for the data used in the calculations and the reasoning behind the assumptions made for the calculations are explained in each chapter. The only exception is the bottleneck for semiconductors, which is explained qualitatively rather than quantitatively. For each of the bottlenecks, the results of the calculations are shown in a graph and further analysed in a separate paragraph. A brief supply forecast and some information on supply risks is also included. For each of the bottlenecks, mitigation measures, e.g. options for recycling and substitution, are mentioned.  Indium, gallium, tellurium and silver for photovoltaics The two main technologies in photovoltaics are thin film photovoltaics and crystalline photovoltaics. For thin film photovoltaics, indium, gallium and tellurium are potential material bottlenecks. For crystalline photovoltaics, silver is a potential material bottleneck. In 2050, The Energy Report (TER) assumes that around 29% of total electricity production is from photovoltaic energy. With an estimated annual electricity production of 127.4 EJ, this means 37 EJ is produced by photovoltaics in TER. For thin film photovoltaics, four different technologies exist. It has been assumed that each of these technologies will have a market share of 25% in 2050. These thin film photovoltaics are the following:  CdTe ­ cadmium and telluride, with tellurium as a potential bottleneck  CI(G)S - copper, indium, selenium and optionally gallium, with indium as a potential bottleneck  GaAs - gallium, arsenic (and optionally germanium), with gallium as a potential bottleneck  aSi ­ silicon, with no bottlenecks identified. The material intensities for each of these technologies and for silver in crystalline photovoltaics are taken from Wild - Scholten (2007) and Fraunhofer (2009). For all four materials, a progress ratio1 of 85% is assumed. This progress ratio is used to calculate the decrease in material intensity over time. For the material calculations, it was assumed that the 37 EJ produced by photovoltaics in 2050 is either met by 100% crystalline photovoltaics or by 100% thin film photovoltaics.  Analysis of materials in photovoltaics  The annual capacity increase of photovoltaics until 2050, and hence also the annual material demand attributed to photovoltaics, were calculated based on annual energy production figures in the TER scenario. Figure 1 shows a comparison between the maximum material demand for one year and production of that material in 2011.   The TER scenario was also used to calculate the cumulative material demand for deploying the photovoltaics capacity up to 2050. Figure 2 shows a comparison of cumulative material demand with the reserves and resources of the materials in 2011. As can be seen in Figure 1, with silver being the notable exception, the maximum annual demand for gallium, indium and tellurium exceeds current production by far. On the other hand, in spite of the lack of information on reserves and resources of many of the materials, Figure 2 shows us that current reserves and resources are in principle able to accommodate the cumulative material demand for photovoltaics until 2050. As can be seen in Figure 2, reserves for silver are currently sufficient to meet cumulative silver demand for photovoltaics, even in a 100% crystalline scenario. When looking at the material requirements in Figure 1 and Figure 2, one should take into account that in reality, it is most likely a mix of crystalline and thin film photovoltaics will be used. This means that total material requirements will be spread over crystalline and thin film photovoltaics. In addition, economic principles will cause a shift to a different technology when material scarcity drives up prices for a certain materials. This will cause the shift to technologies with less material restrictions. In addition to the demand from photovoltaics, material demand arising from other technologies can put additional strain on the market for these materials. An example is the increase in demand for smart phones and light emitting diodes (LEDs), both containing gallium. Currently, the main application of gallium (66%) is in integrated circuits, used in computers and telecommunications. 18% of gallium is used for laser diodes and LEDs and 14% is used in R&D activities. At the moment, only 2% of gallium is used in photovoltaics (UNIA, 2011). An increased demand for gallium for  integrated circuits and LEDs can put additional strain on the supply of gallium for photovoltaics. In addition to bottlenecks caused by a mismatch between supply and demand, bottlenecks can also occur because of geopolitical constraints. An example is the fact that over 50% of refined indium production is controlled by China (UNIA, 2011). Disruptions in trade routes could result in short term material bottlenecks. Key mitigation measures For the three thin film photovoltaic technologies containing indium, gallium and tellurium, substitution can take place with silicon, for which no bottlenecks are expected (USGS, 2012) Indium  Indium is currently considered an impurity in the production process of zinc (JRC, 2011). When an increase in demand for indium causes prices for indium to increase, this will be an economic incentive to produce indium as a co-product of zinc production.  Research into the substitution of indium in Liquid Crystal Displays (LCDs) is underway and is estimated to become commercially available in the next three years. This could free up additional indium for photovoltaics. Gallium arsenide can substitute for indium phosphide in solar cells, but this is a scarce material as well. (USGS, 2012).  Recycling of indium from flat panel displays will become an important aspect of maintaining an adequate indium supply, noting that 74% of total indium consumption is for flat panel displays (JRC, 2011) and hence increasing demand for flat screen displays can put additional strain on the supply of indium for photovoltaics. Gallium  Recycling from electronic scrap is currently non-existent and is difficult because the waste stream is small and dissipative.  There is little research put into the substitution of gallium in solar cells, but substitution will probably lead to lower efficiencies (UNIA, 2011). Possibilities for substituting gallium in LEDs and lasers are being researched (USGS, 2012).  Current gallium production mainly takes place as a by-product of the production of other metals, such as zinc and aluminium. Currently, less than 10% of gallium in bauxite is recovered, mainly due to a lack of refining equipment (JRC, 2011). This means that a gallium bottleneck might be prevented by increasing gallium production by constructing additional refining equipment. This will be more attractive when the economics for recovering gallium become more favourable.    Tellurium  Recycling rates are currently very small, but could increase when PV cells are being recycled. Recovery of tellurium from electronic scraps is difficult due to its dissipative use in small electronics.  For most of its uses, tellurium can be substituted for a different material, although this does lead to production efficiency losses or product characteristics (USGS, 2012). Silver  For several of its current applications, silver could be substituted by other materials. Hence, if supply constraints would arise; silver supply could shift from other applications, such as cutlery and jewellery, to photovoltaics.  Current recycling rates are between 30 and 50%. Good candidates for increasing the recycling rate are jewellery, coinage, catalysts and electronics (UNIA, 2011). A further increase in the price of precious metals will make additional recycling more attractive (UNEP, 2011). Conclusion For some photovoltaics technologies, supply bottlenecks can be expected, but in all cases there are ways to at least partly overcome them. But it is anyway possible to continue with currently dominant crystalline silicon technology, for which no real bottlenecks exist. Indium and gallium for energy efficient lighting Indium and gallium are important materials for the manufacturing of light emitting diodes (LEDs). LEDs will become the dominant technology for energy efficient lighting in the following decades (McKinsey, 2011). Material demand for indium and gallium in LEDs was calculated using:  the total floor surface area of buildings in 2050 (square meters), taken from The Energy Report (TER) scenario  the amount of LEDs per square meter (1 LED per square meter has been assumed)  the material demand per LED, taken from a Fraunhofer study on resources for future technologies (Fraunhofer, 2007) whereby the material demand for a high performance WLED (White LED), an efficient LED type, was taken by Ecofys as the primary source of energy efficient lighting up to 2050. Maximum annual material for energy efficient lighting (LEDs) in tonnes Production 2011 Cummulative material for energy efficient lighting (LEDs) in tonnes Production 2011 (tonnes)  Even though the demand for LEDs is expected to increase significantly over the coming decades, Figure 3 shows that the indium and gallium demand per LED is so small that the maximum annual material demand is insignificant compared to production in 2011. As shown in Figure 4, the cumulative material demand for energy efficient lighting for indium is several magnitudes smaller than production in 2011 and for gallium this is about equal. It should be noted that this cumulative demand is spread out over about 40 years. The comparison with production, instead of with reserves and resources has been made, because figures on reserves and resources are not available for indium and gallium. Key mitigation measures  The development of liquid crystals from organic compounds could become substitutes for indium and gallium in LEDs, although the adjustments of colours might still require indium.  If, in the unlikely event, materials for LEDs become scarce, energy efficient fluorescent lighting could be used as a substitute for LEDs. Fluorescent lighting requires rare earths, however (JRC, 2011).  The paragraph on indium and gallium in photovoltaics explains further options for expanding supply and recycling and substitution for indium and gallium. Conclusion Even though our assumptions on the material demand for LEDs is uncertain, it is clear from the results that neither indium nor gallium is likely to become a bottleneck for the production of LEDs. In the unlikely scenario that this would be the case, substitution by other materials and the development of organic LEDs will alleviate the problem. Rare earths for wind turbines (neodymium and yttrium) Rare earths are used in a number of technologies from The Energy Report (TER) scenario, such as wind turbines, electric vehicles (magnets and batteries) and energy efficient lighting. The supply constraints of rare earths for wind energy are frequently mentioned in studies on critical materials for renewable energy and are therefore selected for a detailed analysis in this study. This requires calculating the maximum annual material demand for wind turbines and the cumulative material demands for wind turbines and comparing them with current production, reserves and resources. Offshore turbines must be able to withstand harsh conditions at sea, such as stronger winds and a salty environment, compared to onshore wind turbines. Page 34 | Critical Materials for the Transition to a 100% Sustainable Energy Future   rare earths are one of the most important bottlenecks for wind turbines  In addition, maintenance for offshore turbines is more difficult than maintenance for onshore turbines. For these reasons, offshore turbines may profit more from direct drive and superconductivity, which are less prone to technical failures and require less frequent maintenance. Since onshore turbines do not suffer from harsh environments and costly maintenance, it has been assumed that onshore wind turbines consist of conventional gearbox turbines, which do not require rare earths. Onshore wind turbines are therefore excluded from this analysis. In the future, if costs for direct drive and superconductive turbines are less prohibitive, onshore wind turbines could also benefit from this technology. This is, however, not included in this analysis. In addition, if serious material constraints would occur, the current technology (without direct drive and use of superconductivity turbines) can be used to avoid these constraints. Direct drive and superconductive turbines require the rare earth elements neodymium and yttrium, respectively, and are therefore included in this analysis. The share of direct drive turbines in 2050 is assumed to be 90% and the share of super conductive turbines is assumed to be 10%. Estimates on the material intensity of neodymium and yttrium for direct drive and superconducting wind turbines have been taken from Fraunhofer (2009). Just as with solar energy, a progress ratio of 85% is assumed. It should be noted that reliable information on rare earths is difficult to obtain (APS, 2011). Information on yttrium is available as a separate entry in the USGS commodities summary. Neodymium, however, only appears as part of the rare earths group. Production statistics for neodymium for 2010 have been obtained from DOE (2010). The reserves of neodymium are assumed to be equal to the reserves of rare earths. For neodymium and yttrium as well as for rare earths in general, information on resources is not available. Analysis of rare earths in wind turbines In 2050, the TER scenario assumes that 5% of global electricity production comes from off-shore wind turbines. With an estimated annual electricity production of 127 EJ, this means that around 6.4 EJ is produced by off-shore wind turbines annually. Based on this figure, assumptions have been made for the annual growth of offshore wind turbines and the total capacity of turbines required to produce this electricity in 2050. Using these data, the maximum annual material demand has been calculated. The cumulative material demand for offshore wind turbines has also been determined. This has been compared with figures for production, reserves and resources in 2050, see Figure 5 and Figure 6. Even if offshore wind energy supply is higher, such as around 10-20 EJ eventually by 2050, constraints for both elements, neodymium and yttrium, are unlikely.  As can be seen in Figure 5, the maximum yearly demand of neodymium and yttrium for wind technologies is a lot lower than the current production of neodymium and yttrium. Furthermore, Figure 6 shows that the cumulative demand for neodymium and yttrium required for offshore wind turbines is a lot smaller than reserves in Page 36 | Critical Materials for the Transition to a 100% Sustainable Energy Future   2011. Additional demand due to wind turbines is so small that it hardly shows up in the figure. This means that, even though demand growth for rare earths due to requirements for other applications is expected to rise sharply in the next five to ten years, rare earths will most likely not be a bottleneck for the implementation of wind energy in TER. (JRC, 2011)  The reason that these rare earths are considered a bottleneck is not because the quantities of the material are not enough to meet demand, but for other, geopolitical reasons. The main reason is that the majority of production is concentrated in a single country, namely China (APS, 2011). In recent years, rare earths have been the subject of export restrictions, which has given rise to concerns in for instance Japan, the United States and Europe. Eliminating these geopolitical constraints on the short term is difficult.  2030 The maximum annual material demand for lithium and cobalt occurs in 20In some cases, rare earths elements are the by-products of iron, zirconium, tin, thorium, or uranium production (APS, 2011). Projects to expand rare earth production are underway, but opening new mines requires large investments and time and almost a decade goes by before they are up and running. This means that even though reserves are more than enough to accommodate demand until 2050, increasing supply on the short run might be difficult. In addition, the exploitation of rare earth reserves can lead to severe environmental problems, which makes it difficult to open new mines in areas with strict environmental regulations. Key mitigation measures  Recycling of rare earths from pre-consumer magnets requires further research. Recycling from post-consumer waste, such as rare earths found in hard-drives is a possibility, although it can take some time before significant quantities enter the waste stream.   The substitution of rare earths used in permanent magnets, which are used in wind turbines, is difficult and has a negative effect on performance. Using other types of wind turbines, such as those using conventional gearboxes, however, can be a solution to eventual remaining bottlenecks (JRC, 2011).  Conclusion  The material demand for wind turbines is so small compared to annual production and reserves and resources that no supply bottlenecks are expected. In addition, it is possible to use conventional gearboxes instead of permanent magnets.  Cobalt and lithium for high density batteries The Energy Report (TER) scenario assumes a complete shift to plug-in hybrids and/ or electric vehicles for light duty vehicles. Light duty vehicles include personal two-wheelers, city cars and non-city cars. It is assumed that these vehicles will each have a battery that contains lithium and cobalt. In 2050, the TER scenario contains close to 3.3 billion light-duty vehicles.    Skutterudite is mined as an ore of cobalt and nickel with a byproduct of arsenic.  For these calculations, it is assumed that the batteries for light duty vehicles in the TER scenario will be the same as for plug in hybrid vehicles as presented in DOE (2010). The vehicles in the DOE report have a range of 40 miles (64 kilometres). The DOE provides a high and a low figure for the amounts of lithium and cobalt contained in these batteries. The high figure for lithium in batteries is 5.07 kg and the low figure is 1.35 kg. For cobalt this is 3.77 and 0 kg respectively. In order to calculate the material demand, the average of these low and the high figures have been used. This makes the amount of lithium and cobalt in a battery 3.2 and 1.9 kg, respectively. In a study on batteries from 2010, Boston Consulting Group (BCG) has estimated the cost developments of batteries from 2010 to 2020. Almost all of the cost reduction comes from increased production volumes, which are economy of scale effects. In contrast, almost no cost reductions are expected from production-volumeindependent costs, which mainly consist of material costs. From this information it can be deduced that the material demand per battery is not expected to decrease much over time. For this reason, no technological learning has been taken into account for batteries. The fact that `limited' material learning will occur is not unexpected. For batteries, the capacity is to a large extent determined by the amount of active materials. This means that material use cannot be reduced substantially without reducing battery capacities. For each 5 year period from 2000 to 2050, TER contains figures for the amount of new light duty vehicles. The amount of new vehicles per period is multiplied by the material intensity of that period to arrive at total material demand for that period. The sum of these amounts is the total material demand for batteries in new electric and hybrid vehicles from 2000 until 2050. The maximum annual material demand for lithium and cobalt occurs in 2030. These figures are compared to current production of lithium and cobalt and shown in Figure 7. The cumulative material demand for lithium and cobalt is compared to current reserves and resources and shown in Figure 8. The results presented in Figure 7 and Figure 8 have been calculated without taking into account the limited lifetime of batteries for electric vehicles. This means that the actual amount of batteries required for vehicles from 2000 until 2050 in the TER scenario is likely to be higher than shown in Figure 7 and Figure 8. It is difficult to include the lifetime of batteries in these calculations, because very little information is available on this issue, due to limited hands on experience with electric vehicles. Another complicating factor is the fact that the lifetime is largely dependent on the usage of the battery, such as kilometres driven and how it is charged. A lot of research is being poured into the development of more efficient and durable batteries.  Figure 7 shows that current production levels of lithium and cobalt are not sufficient to meet the yearly peak material demand for batteries in the TER report. Especially for lithium the difference is large. In addition, Figure 8 shows that expected material requirements for both materials are large compared to reserves and resources. If   the limited lifetime of batteries would be taken into account, this shortage would be even more pronounced. Also, if more than the assumed 3.3 billion electric vehicles are on the road eventually or in case electrification expands into other transport areas in the future such as freight vehicles and/or aviation and shipping there may be further shortages. However, reductions in material intensity for batteries used in the calculations is conservative compared to the estimates made for wind and solar. Current lithium production mainly takes place in Chile, Australia, China and Argentina. Lithium batteries power the majority of cell phones and laptops. Demand for lithium has grown continuously over the last ten years and is expected to continue growing by 5 to 10% annually during the next decade. Therefore, recycling of lithium is a key issue. Cobalt is usually produced as a by-product of the production of other metals, such as copper or nickel. It is primarily produced in the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC), Australia and Cuba. Instability in the DRC could lead to short term supply bottlenecks. The majority of cobalt is refined in China, making cobalt subject to the same insecurities as rare earths. In addition to batteries, cobalt is also used in superalloys, cutting tools and catalysts. Additional demand for these applications could put additional strain on the availability of cobalt for batteries. UNEP reports moderate expected growth rates for cobalt (UNEP, 2011). Key mitigation measures Lithium  At this moment lithium prices are not high enough to make recycling profitable. Expected price increases, technological developments and legal measures making battery recycling compulsory, could result in higher recycling rates for lithium (UNEP, 2009).  Substitution of lithium for other materials in the non-energy sector, which is at present still substantial, is often possible. This could free up additional lithium for batteries (UNIA, 2011). Cobalt  On a positive note, a switch in materials to less cobalt intensive cathodes for batteries could greatly reduce the demand for cobalt in the future.  Although at present not as effective as cobalt containing batteries, substituting lithium batteries containing cobalt for those that do not contain cobalt could circumvent bottlenecks (BCG, 2010).  Recycling, which is already taking place in for instance rechargeable batteries, can be expanded without a lot of effort. Current recycling rates are at 25% (UNIA, 2011). Conclusion The large material demand for cobalt and lithium compared with annual production and reserves and resources indicates that these materials might become a bottleneck for a fully sustainable energy system as represented in The Energy Report (TER). Copper for infrastructure, energy supply and energy efficient electric motors Copper is one of the most widely used metals on earth. In addition to usage in roofing, plumbing and industrial machinery, it is used primarily in electrical wires (USGS, 2011). Copper is used for long and short distance electricity transport and distribution, e.g. from the power plant to the consumer. In addition, copper is used in many of the renewable energy supply technologies in The Energy Report (TER), such as transformers in wind turbines and in solar energy. Copper is also used in electric motors. In general, more efficient electric motors require more copper. A key aspect of TER is the large expansion of supply-driven renewable energy sources; wind energy, solar photovoltaics and wave energy. To accommodate the integration of a large share of these variable renewables, there are several options. Expansion of the electricity infrastructure is one of them, as it provides more flexibility to match supply and demand on a continental scale. Even though copper has not been highlighted as a critical metal by many of the critical material studies, the combined projected increase in copper demand as a result of several of the technologies included in the TER scenario could make it a bottleneck after all. In order to determine whether this is the case, the maximum and total copper demand for solar and wind energy over the years was calculated, as well as the copper required for energy efficient electric motors and copper attributed to the expansion of infrastructure:  For solar energy, it was assumed that the 37 EJ electricity production in 2050 attributed to photovoltaics is met by a mix of 60% crystalline PV and 40% thin film PV. Copper requirements for concentrating solar power (CSP), which is expected to have an annual electricity production of 21.6 EJ by 2050, is also taken into account. For wind energy, copper demands for both onand offshore wind turbines were taken into account, with an expected annual electricity production of 25.3 and 6.7 EJ respectively. For each of these technologies, assumptions were made on the annual growth in capacity and the associated copper demand. The peak in copper demand for energy production technologies is expected to occur in 2045.  In order to calculate the additional copper requirements for energy efficient electric motors, figures on the electricity consumed by electric motors in 2006 were extrapolated to 2050 using the expected GDP growth as presented in TER (IEA, 2011, p. 39). The electricity consumption in 2050 was used to calculate installed capacity in 2050. It was assumed that copper requirements for current electric motors (class IE2) are 1000 ton per GW installed capacity. It was also assumed that by 2050, all electric motors are of the IE3 class and energy efficient electric motors are of the IE4 class. It was assumed that for each improvement in efficiency class, roughly 1.2 times more copper is required (Ecofys Estimate), 2012). By assuming a lifetime of 20 years for electric motors, the annual copper requirements for energy efficient electrical motors in 2050 have been calculated (IEA, 2011).  The annual copper demand for an expansion of existing electricity infrastructure to accommodate renewable energy sources was calculated  taking the approach described in Appendix A. Note that these calculations used conservative assumptions, resulting most likely in an overestimate of copper demand for infrastructure.  Figure 9 shows that the combined additional copper demand due to the expansion of the electricity infrastructure, solar and wind energy and energy efficient electrical motors is small compared to copper production in 2011. Figure 10 shows that cumulative copper demand for these developments until 2050 is marginal compared with reserves and resources in 2011. These results show that from a technical point of view, copper will most likely not be a bottleneck for a fully sustainable energy system as represented in The Energy Report (TER). However, an increase in copper demand, also due to technologies not included in the TER, will lead to companies expanding production by using lower quality ores. This leads to increased energy requirements for copper production and increased copper prices (Harmsen, 2011). Key mitigation measures  Recycling of copper from old infrastructure and other applications is possible, although it is hindered by the sometimes long use phase of copper and the different waste flows that contain copper, often ending up in landfills. In addition, copper is often only a small part of the host product and it is difficult or inefficient to recycle copper from alloys. For these reasons, Harmsen claims that it is difficult to expect a very high recycling rate (Harmsen, 2011).  In many applications, copper can be substituted for other materials. Examples are plastics in tubing and glass fiber in telecommunication. For the technologies examined in this chapter, aluminium is the most likely candidate for substitution. Aluminium is a good material to use for electricity infrastructure, although the lower density of aluminium would lead to wires with a larger diameter. For electrical motors, the lower density of aluminium could result in    performance loss. It is important to keep in mind that even though aluminium is more abundant than copper, it requires more energy to produce (Harmsen, 2011). Conclusion In spite of the many different applications of copper in a fully sustainable energy system as represented in TER, demand is still low compared with supply in 2011 and reserves and resources. Reducing demand through substitution and increasing supply by recycling further reduce the likelihood of the occurrence of a bottleneck. Semiconductors for smart electronics Semiconductors are important components in electrical and electronic equipment including cell phones, personal computers, automotive electronics, LEDs and solar cells. Accordingly, the production volumes for these components have increased in recent decades and are expected to continue to increase up to 2050. For power electronics, which have been mentioned in chapter 3, it has been difficult to find information on the materials involved in their production and the development of demand for power electronics in the future. For lack of information, they have been excluded from further analysis. Semiconductors are an integral part of improving energy efficiency in the built environment as well as in industry and transport. Electronics containing semiconductors are required, for instance, to regulate temperature in buildings and optimise production processes in manufacturing plants. Semiconductors are hence an important aspect in The Energy Report (TER) scenario and it is worthwhile to assess the possibilities for bottlenecks in the supply of semiconductors for the TER scenario. However, it is difficult to quantify the expected increase in the global demand for semiconductors and, in particular, which share to attribute to developments in the TER scenario versus other demand sectors. In addition, many different types of semiconductors exist, consisting of many different materials, including arsenic, germanium, indium, gallium, rhenium, silicon and tellurium (USGS, 2011 and UNIA, 2011). It is worth noting that the supply of a number of these materials, such as gallium, indium and tellurium, may already be strained by the introduction of other technologies in the TER scenario, such as photovoltaics. Many materials required for the production of semiconductors can be substituted with other materials, although these are often also scarce. In addition, since these materials are used for other applications, it may be possible to reduce their usage in these other applications to free up materials for the production of semiconductors when supplies become tight. All these different factors make it a difficult and time-intensive task to quantitatively assess whether any material bottlenecks for semiconductors are likely to occur in the TER scenario. It would require an in depth assessment of all the different materials involved in the production of semiconductors, their production forecasts, competing demand sectors and mitigation measures such as recycling and substitution. While this analysis is outside the scope of this project, additional research in this area would provide worthwhile insights if undertaken.  The Energy Report (TER) tries to limit the use of biomass for energy purposes. When other renewable energy sources are not feasible, TER resorts to biomass. For example, biomass is assumed as the fuel source for trucks, planes and ships, for which it is presently difficult to switch from fossil fuels to electric energy sources. Biomass is also used for industrial processes, where very high temperatures are required. The TER scenario conservatively assumes that it will be necessary to obtain biomass from sustainably grown biofuel crops and from sustainable forest management, even though a portion of biomass demand can be met using waste streams. Care is taken not to threaten food and water supplies and biodiversity and to prevent CO2 emissions. The need to grow additional biomass for biofuels, albeit as sustainably as possible, raises the issue of potentially increased demand for artificial fertilisers. The most important components of fertilisers, also mentioned in TER, are nitrogen, phosphorus and potassium. The TER scenario considers a closed loop approach in order to minimise the need for fertiliser. This includes precision farming, minimising losses to the environment and recycling nutrients from residue and waste streams. It is, however, likely that at least some additional demand for fertilisers will be caused by the increased production of crops for biofuels Since atmospheric nitrogen is freely available for nitrogen fixation on a global level, nitrogen is not expected to be a bottleneck for the production of fertilisers. However, phosphorus and potassium have to be mined from phosphate rock and potash. For phosphate rock, world resources exceed 300 billion tonnes (USGS, 2012). Global reserves are estimated to be 71 billion tonnes. With an estimated production of 0.191 billion tonnes in 2011, phosphate reserves and resources are able to meet demand far beyond 2050, even if demand grows significantly. For potash, world resources and reserves total 250 and 9.5 billion tonnes respectively. With an annual production in 2011 of 37 million tonnes, a large increase in demand should be easily accommodated within existing resources (USGS, 2012). Since all three key components of artificial fertilisers are readily available and production is spread out over many countries with a broad geological spread, materials required for the production of fertilisers are not expected to become bottlenecks for achieving the TER scenario.    5. Comparison Material Demand TER Scenario and NP Scenario    As discussed in chapter 4, a fully Comparison Material sustainable energy scenario like The Energy Demand TER Scenario Report (TER) will lead to additional and np Scenario material demand for some materials. However, a development of society as described in TER also has certain benefits in terms of material use. This chapter will qualitatively assess the key differences in material demand between the TER scenario and a conventional ambitious scenario, the International Energy Agency's (IEA) New Policy Scenario (NPS), the business as usual scenario. The NPS is the most central scenario for forecasts from the IEA and is commonly used as a basis for energy market studies. Although the NPS only runs until 2035, the comparison has been made based on the information which is available. Material requirements to achieve the TER scenario and NPS Both the TER scenario and NPS require increasing amounts of materials including critical materials. However, due to the different technology types deployed, there are important differences in the types of critical materials required. The most critical bottlenecks in a transition to the TER scenario are:  lithium and cobalt for electric vehicles. As detailed in Chapter 4, other materials, such as rare earths for wind turbines and copper for wind and solar energy, energy efficient motors and a more elaborate electricity infrastructure, are less likely to be bottlenecks. Indium, gallium and tellurium are not considered an important bottleneck, because their use in photovoltaics can be substituted by using technologies using less critical materials, such as silicon. Material supply bottlenecks illustrate the importance of an early material strategy. Whether or not a technology is prone to suffer from supply chain bottlenecks should be taken into consideration when making an investment decision or making R&D decisions. In these cases, technologies that rely on abundant materials have an advantage over technologies that rely on critical materials.  A continued reliance on conventional energy sources such as fossil fuels and nuclear energy in the NPS means an increased demand for materials used in the fossil fuels and nuclear industries. For example, the IEA estimates that in 2035 the share of fossil fuels in global primary energy consumption is 75% and the output of nuclear energy rises by 70% over the period to 2035 (IEA, 2011). Although only playing a role at the end of the 2035 period, carbon capture and storage (CCS) is important due to the continued reliance on fossil fuels, and would be expected to play an increasingly important role up to 2050. Examples of critical materials which will experience increased demand can be found in the USGS Mineral Commodity Summaries 2012 (USGS, 2012):   the usage of bromine in flue gas scrubbers in power plants   barite, beryllium and cesium in oil and gas well drilling fluids   rare earth chlorides for the production of fluid-cracking catalysts in oil refineries  The mineral bismuth is used for liquid coolants   barite for high-density concrete for radiation shielding  bismuth for liquid coolants   hafnium and indium for nuclear reactor control rod alloys   materials required for CCS include chemicals for the capture installations, materials for pipelines and for drilling platforms  Many of the material bottlenecks for the TER scenario are not relevant for the NPS. A reduced capacity of photovoltaics as compared with the TER scenario means a smaller likelihood of an indium, gallium or tellurium bottleneck. Continued reliance on oil as the basis for transportation fuels (since electric vehicles are not considered commercially viable and the potential for substitution of oil in transport is considered limited) mean significantly less electric vehicles as compared to the TER scenario and hence a reduced likelihood of lithium or cobalt (for batteries) becoming a bottleneck.  However, many of the material bottlenecks for the NPS are also not relevant for the TER scenario. Fossil fuels in the energy mix will meet only 5% of total energy supply in 2050, hence fossil fuel scarcities will not arise in the TER scenario. In addition, since TER excludes CCS and nuclear energy by 2050, these bottlenecks will neither be relevant for TER scenario.    In the TER scenario higher material efficiency, for example in the building of vehicles with lighter steel frames is assumed.   The importance of energy efficiency and material efficiency in the TER scenario and NPS An important part of the TER scenario is the far reaching development in efficiency, which is expected to occur in all sectors of society, ranging from transportation, to the built environment and to industry. The NPS also states that efficiency measures will affect energy consumption, but at a much smaller scale than in the TER scenario. As a result, both scenarios have very different predictions about energy consumption in the future. The TER scenario will not only assume a higher energy efficiency, but also a higher material efficiency. An example from TER is building cars with lighter frames, leading to lower steel demand per vehicle. There are many options to reduce demand for primary materials, such as product recycling, material recycling and more efficient product design (Allwood et al., 2011. Worrell et al., 1997). Conclusion The most important developments affecting the differences in material demand between the TER scenario and the NPS are the share of renewable energy and fossil fuels, energy efficiency measures, material efficiency measures and energy consumption. Although some of the material bottlenecks for the TER scenario are larger than those in the NPS, energy efficiency measures, an increase in material efficiency, the absence of nuclear energy and a significantly reduced reliance on fossil fuels will most likely lead to a smaller overall demand in scarce resources than in the NPS.  