 FT REPORT - FUND MANAGEMENT, Monday, November 14, 2016 540 mots, p. 10

HSBC pension puts £1.85bn in green fund

Climate change
By Chris Flood

Pressure on large investors to protect portfolios from climate change risks

HSBC has invested £1.85bn of its UK employees' pension savings in a new environmentally friendly fund, as pressure mounts on large investors to protect their portfolios from the risks associated with climate change .

The UK bank has chosen the Future World fund run by Legal & General Investment Management, Britain's largest fund house, as the default equity option for its defined contribution pension scheme.

Mark Thompson, chief investment officer at HSBC's UK pension scheme, which has 80,000 members, said that taking action on climate change was now the "new normal" for investors.

"This fund will offer our members better risk-adjusted returns, incorporate greater climate change protection and deliver improved company engagement," he said.

Investment managers have been stepping up their efforts to address the risks of global warming after governments around the world signed an agreement to tackle climate change in Paris in December 2015.

Mark Carney , the governor of the Bank of England, also warned last year that action to meet global climate change targets could leave companies that rely on fossil fuels as worthless "stranded" assets.

LGIM's decision to launch the Future World fund signals a hardening of the UK asset manager's stance on environmental issues affecting investors.

Meryam Omi, LGIM's head of sustainability, said: "Companies that fail to meet the minimum environmental standards will be excluded from the Future World fund. This is a powerful message that we are sending to companies that they need to step up to meet the challenges of moving to a low-carbon economy."

LGIM is planing to use its clout as the UK's largest investment manager to vote against the chairmen of companies that perform poorly on its environmental scores across all of its funds.

The Future World fund tracks a new FTSE Russell index of global companies that score well on four performance measures - value, quality, low volatility and size - that have delivered outperformance compared with conventional benchmarks.

The fund then reduces its exposure to companies with high oil and gas reserves and those with high carbon emissions, while increasing its exposure to companies with low carbon emissions and those with increasing revenues from environmentally friendly activities.

This means that coal producers have been excluded from the fund's portfolio, while the weighting of diversified mining companies that produce coal as part of their total output has been reduced by 75 per cent. The weighting of two energy sectors, oil and gas producers and oil equipment, services and distribution companies, has been reduced by 25 per cent.

LGIM surveyed 1,600 pension scheme members and found that 81 per cent want their pension scheme to be invested in responsible companies that are likely to improve living standards for future generations. However, nearly half of those surveyed were only prepared to sacrifice up to 1 per cent of returns by divesting from companies that harm the environment.

Emma Douglas, LGIM's head of defined contribution, said: "There is a perception that investors have to give up returns to invest responsibly. But let us be clear, savers do not want to see their returns reduced to meet climate change goals."
