 WORLD NEWS, Thursday, November 13, 2008 330 mots, p. 10

Watchdog in plea to avert 'shocking' climate change
By Ed Crooks in London

Restricting the rise in global temperatures to only 2째C will require the use of new technologies that are not yet widely available and a price for carbon dioxide emissions well above today's levels, the International Energy Agency warned yesterday.

The developed countries' watchdog said in its annual World Energy Outlook that continued growth in energy use with "business as usual" policies would have "shocking" consequences for the climate - raising average temperatures by up to 6째C.

Warming on that scale would be catastrophic, causing the melting of the ice at both poles, according to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.

Nobuo Tanaka, the IEA's executive director, said it would be "possible, but very hard" to cut carbon emissions to keep atmospheric concentration of CO2 no higher than 450 parts per million - a level consistent with a rise of only 2째C in average temperatures.

Keeping atmospheric CO2 to 550ppm would be easier and would not require any technologies that have not yet been deployed. But it would still demand significant changes to the world's energy system and would imply a temperature rise of up to 3째C, with damaging effects including droughts in some regions and increased flooding in others.

Renewable energy, particularly wind power, is growing fast and is set to overtake gas as the world's second largest source of electricity generation, after coal, not long after 2010, the IEA believes.

However, to reach its 450ppm scenario, there would still need to be enormous changes. Wind power capacity, for example, would have to increase more than 13-fold from its present level by 2030 and nuclear power would need to double.

By the same date, coal and gas-fired power stations equivalent to 15 per cent of today's global capacity would need to be fitted with equipment to capture and store CO2 emissions - a technology that is not expected to be demonstrated in a large-scale project until well into the next decade.

Other technologies that are not yet available on a commercial scale, such as advanced "second generation" biofuels made from algae or plant waste, would also be needed.

The IEA highlighted the importance of the world's developing countries' signing-up to international emissions-reduction plans.

If the countries outside the Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development continued along the "business as usual path", even the complete cessation of all carbon dioxide emissions from OECD members would not be enough to reach the IEA's 450ppm scenario.
