 WORLD NEWS, Thursday, December 18, 2008 582 mots, p. 8

EU climate bill paves way for hard year of talks
By Fiona Harvey in London and Joshua Chaffin in Strasbourg

The world's most stringent climate change package was approved by the European parliament yesterday, setting the scene for the toughest talks ever undertaken on climate change.

A packed year of international negotiations on climate change culminates in a crunch meeting next December in Copenhagen, at which 190 countries will gather to forge an agreement on cutting emissions that will replace the Kyoto protocol when its main provisions expire in 2012.

The clearing of the European Union's final hurdle means the bloc is now committed to cutting its greenhouse gas emissions 20 per cent from 1990 levels by 2020; generating at least 20 per cent of its energy from renewable sources by 2020; and committing billions of euros in funding to develop carbon capture and storage technology.

Many parliamentarians complained that changes to the emissions trading system at the centre of the package were too generous to corporate interests and that the legislation allowed member states to undertake most of their emissions reductions outside of Europe. Nonetheless, they voted in favour.

"Of course, it's not a perfect agreement. But if we say 'no', we're left with nothing - with our arms empty," said Lena Ek, a liberal democrat from Sweden, echoing a common refrain.

Europe is expected to play a leading role in Copenhagen in brokering a deal with the US, Japan and rapidly developing countries such as India and, most importantly, China - which has overtaken the US to become the world's biggest emitter of greenhouse gases.

Europe's stringent measures - and its offer to up its target to a cut of 30 per cent in emissions compared with 1990 levels by 2020 if other countries come to an agreement - will put pressure on other developed countries to seal a deal.

But the most hopeful sign for a deal is the change of administration in the US. George W. Bush, the incumbent president, was accused by many other countries of stalling on global warming for years.

Barack Obama, who will take office in January, sent Senator John Kerry to a UN climate change meeting in Poznan, Poland, last week. Mr Kerry promised a fruitful partnership with Europe and said Mr Obama was determined to forge a deal on emissions cuts and invest in a low-carbon programme that would yield millions of new jobs.

"Mr Obama has made it clear he supports mandatory targets," the senator said. "This is a significant departure from where we have been [under Mr Bush]."

But in spite of any newfound partnership between Europe and the US, next year's negotiations are likely to be tough.

One of the faultlines - over how the burden of emissions cuts should be shared between rich and poor nations - was exposed towards the end of the Poznan conference, when developing countries, including Brazil and India, accused richer countries at the talks of a lack of generosity.

Yvo de Boer, the UN's senior climate change official, said: "Poznan achieved what it was supposed to but it ended on a rather grim note . . . It's a worrying sign that people are taking up positions for a hard negotiation."

Few would expect developing countries to sign up for absolute cuts in emissions of the kind that developed countries have taken on. But Mr Kerry made it clear that rapidly emerging economies, such as China, would have to commit to curb their emissions to ensure they do not rise as fast as they have in the recent past - in the UN jargon, to "deviate from business as usual".

China's leadership has shown an increasing willingness to negotiate on these points but is likely to demand some incentives in order to agree. Other developing countries might take a much harder line.

Among developed countries, a consensus is lacking. Australia unveiled a climate package this week but agreed only to cut emissions 5 per cent compared with 2000 levels by 2020 and by 15 per cent only in the "unlikely" event that other nations agreed to do the same. Japan is yet to come forward with a 2020 target and is wary of any agreement that penalises its industry compared with less efficient companies in China.

The world's environment ministers will meet for UN negotiations at least twice and probably more often next year. Heads of state and government are likely to meet at least once, at a conference being mooted at the UN in September.

If scientific warnings are correct, the talks will decide whether or not global warming reaches catastrophic levels. The stakes could scarcely be higher.
