 News, Monday, September 14, 2020 910 mots, p. 2

Protests help activists recover from funding crunch

Extinction Rebellion. Legislative demands Coronavirus forced climate group into 'hibernation' while donations dried up
LESLIE HOOK AND ANNA GROSS

Extinction Rebellion, the climate protest movement that brought London to its knees a year ago, is calling on the government to consider new climate legislation, as it wraps up its first public demonstrations since lockdown.

The climate group, known as "XR", has emerged from its Covid-19 "hibernation" with 10 days of protests around the UK, including blockading several printing presses and repeated demonstrations outside parliament. However, the much smaller size of the protests this year also reflects a movement that is trying to find its feet again after the impact of the pandemic, the racial justice movement, financial difficulties and leadership conflicts. Gathering in Parliament Square, protesters chanted, cheered, heard speeches and ate vegan pasta from the back of a bicycle cart. But the crowd was just a fraction of what it was last year and flanked by a heavy police presence.

"There's certainly been a contraction in numbers," said Gail Bradbrook, one of the co-founders of the movement, speaking by phone ahead of the event.

Christine Glossop, a protester from Cardiff, said she was demonstrating because "the government are doing nothing".

She held a small sign that read "Extinction Rebellion: Breaking the law in a very limited and specific way", a reference to the government's statement on the Brexit withdrawal agreement. "We are in a climate catastrophe," she said. "We need to take drastic action."

Ms Bradbrook said that despite the smaller numbers, XR's "September Rebellion" had been a great success. Shutting down the printing presses, a move criticised by government officials including Prime Minister Boris Johnson, was "an escalation tactic that had the impact one would predict", she said.

Two weekends ago XR protesters blockaded three News Corp printing sites, impacting publication of physical newspapers including The Sun, The Times, the Daily Mail, and the Evening Standard. Some Financial Times sections were also affected "We've tickled the nose of the tiger, the establishment are frothing at the mouth," she said.

After gaining prominence in 2019, XR gathered support from celebrities and society figures but had to pause its activities when coronavirus struck.

Last year the movement helped propel the UK to adopt a net zero emissions target for 2050. XR's demands also spurred six parliamentary select committees to form the UK's first citizens' climate assembly, which last week delivered its non-binding recommendations. But the group ran out of funding around the time that lockdown began in March, and donations dried up.

In April, XR had to stop paying about 150 members who had been receiving stipends of up to £400 a week in "volunteer living expenses", according to finance team member Andrew Medhurst. "We kind of went into hibernation.

It was a period of reflection," said Mr Medhurst. "As we moved into February it was clear we were living beyond our means … This cash crisis meant that we had to tighten our belts."

The protests in the past two weeks had been run "on a shoestring budget" compared with last year, he said.

Donations have started pouring in again since XR returned to the streets, with more than £240,000 raised through a crowdfunding drive in the summer.

"When politicians are saying they are going to stop XR, that is a threat but it is also an opportunity, especially from a fundraising perspective," Mr Medhurst said, referring to reports that the government was looking to reclassify XR as an organised crime group.

"I think this week will definitely have buoyed the spirits of many rebels," said Farhana Yamin, an active XR member who led its political strategy team until last summer. "I feel like, yeah, XR are back and that is a good thing, and I hope there is more funding that comes through. It is a very tough environment to get funding now."

XR UK is asking the government to cut carbon emissions close to zero by 2025; to acknowledge the devastation of climate change; and to uphold recommendations of the citizens' assembly on climate action. It is also urging parliament to consider a new private member's bill, the climate and ecological emergency bill.

At the same time as dealing with the financial disruptions of Covid-19, the group has also been thrown off balance by the racial justice movement and Black Lives Matter protests.

XR UK, whose members are mostly white, has been debating whether to add a demand about justice — including racial justice — to its key demands. It has not done so, despite a poll showing twothirds of members would support this.

Tensions spilled into the open on Thursday in Parliament Square, when a man spray painted the Winston Churchill statue with the words "is a racist". He was taken away by police. A spokesman said it was "not an XR action".

The splintering of XR's top leadership and its decentralised, "holacratic" governance style have also been problematic, several leaders told the FT.

"One of the tensions in XR are people who want to slow down and be strategic and then people who think it's an emergency, let's get out on the street now," said Ms Bradbrook. "There have been conflicts and disagreements." 