 News, Friday, July 31, 2020 364 mots, p. 11

UK breaks records for high temperatures six times in one year
By Emma Gatten environment editor

THE UK broke six records for temperature highs last year in evidence of the increasing influence of global warming on the British climate, the Met Office said yesterday.

Last July saw a new all-time high temperature of 38.7C (101.66F), recorded in Cambridge, while in February a new winter record-high of 21.2C was recorded in Kew Gardens, the first time 20C has been reached in the British winter.

December broke its one-day record high with an 18.7C temperature in Sutherland, and February had a record minimum temperature of 13.9C.

July and February's all-time and winter records also technically added two more records, for highest temperatures in those months.

In contrast, no national low-temperature records were set during the year, according to the Met Office's annual State of the UK Climate report.

It came as the country was braced to experience its warmest day of the year so far during a mini heatwave that will end as early as tomorrow. Temperatures are expected to reach up to 35C in London as a result of warm air drawn up from the continent.

But Saturday is expected to bring a return back down to temperatures in the mid-20s, with more rain and cloud, in a sign that typical British weather patterns prevail, despite the warming trends.

Commenting on the Met Office report, lead author Mike Kendon said it showed "climate change is exerting an increasing impact on the UK's climate". "This year was warmer than any other year in the UK between 1884 and 1990, and since 2002 we have seen the warmest 10 years in the series. By contrast, to find a year in the coldest 10 we have to go back to 1963; over 50 years ago."

For only the second year, the report also examined changes in phenology - recurring events in nature and their relationships with climate - in recognition of the growing impact on our natural world. Using data sent in by volunteers, researchers found that the first leaves appeared on trees nearly 10 days earlier in 2019 compared with the average for the previous 20 years.
