Paris, for the  People and  the Planet  The Encyclical Laudato Si’ –  what it means for the COP21  negotiations and beyond  Executive summary  and key asks  This publication by CIDSE – an international alliance of 17 Catholic development agencies –  sets what we want to see from the Paris agreement as the first step to strong global action.  This is based on the evidence from our partners and poor communities of how a changing  climate is impacting on them. It is based on an ethical approach, inspired by Laudato Si’,  Pope Francis’ Encyclical Letter on Care for Our Common Home.1 This calls on governments  to consider the moral dimension of political decision, placing the poorest communities who  are suffering the most from climate change impacts at the centre of the debate. This report  outlines CIDSE’s vision for what the Encyclical means for the Paris agreement.  Governments agreed in Copenhagen in 2009 that “the increase in global temperature should  be below 2°C [compared to pre-industrial levels].”2 However, a recent expert report3 found  that, in some regions and vulnerable ecosystems, high risks are projected even for warming  above 1.5°C.4 This means the world needs to raise its ambition to tackle the climate crisis.  Richer countries – which have industrialised first and caused the current climate crisis  – should be the first to act, as they have the primary historical responsibility to prevent  dangerous climate change. They should assist poorer countries to adapt to its impacts and  pursue alternative, less polluting development models. Therefore, developed countries need  to implement deep cuts in domestic greenhouse gas emissions as a way to pay the “ecological  debt” owed to poorer countries, and ensure they deliver adequate, predictable and timely  climate finance to poor countries.  There are also a number of other issues which should form part of the Paris Agreement  discussions, such as the link with hunger and food security, the need to provide electricity to  billions who don’t have it, and the need to challenge the current economic model of growth  and the exclusive focus on market-based solutions.  The ecological crisis also reveals the systemic failures of a political and economic order driven  by vested interests and the exclusive focus on market-based solutions, which has failed to  put the common good at the heart of the economy. The current growth and development  paradigm is based on unequal economic, social and political systems, unequal distribution  and access to resources like water and land, leading to human rights violations, environmental  and social degradation and conflicts. Looking beyond the specific debate around the Paris  agreement, this needs to be challenged.  Finally, the ecological crisis is also a moral one. Inspired by Catholic Social Teaching, CIDSE  has always considered issues such as climate change from the viewpoint of entire humanity, to  provide a moral compass that motivates people everywhere to think about how their choices  are impacting on the poorest and most vulnerable.  4 Paris, for the People and the Planet  Therefore, CIDSE’s key asks to the international community for Paris and beyond are:  } Phase out all fossil fuel emissions and move towards a 100% renewable energy future with  sustainable energy access for all as early as possible (no later than 2050);  } Ensure that the 1.5°C threshold is enshrined in a legally binding global agreement;  } Set a goal for complete decarbonisation by 2050;  } Establish five-year reviews of pledges and ambition;  } Ensure a rights-based approach consistent with all relevant international conventions  (especially the right to food, land and water) to prevent any threat on human rights.  On climate finance:  } Developed countries should provide a plan and timeline on how they will ramp up  support to developing countries to meet the US$100 billion goal. They should include  increased public finance (particularly for adaptation needs up to 2020 and beyond) and  include five-year reviews of climate finance to prevent double-counting with existing ODA  commitments. There should be an improvement of the balance between the allocation of  finance to mitigation and adaptation and separate targets for each;  } Polluting fossil fuel projects should not be funded. Robust and transparent accounting  rules should be in place, to ensure climate investments “do-no-harm” and are socially  inclusive and gender sensitive.  On climate and agriculture:  } An explicit reference in the operative section of the core Paris agreement to the impact  of climate change on food security and the need to ensure climate action does not have  negative impacts on it;  } Mitigation of emissions in the land sector must not result in less ambition in other sectors;  } Support and promote agroecology (including through adequate public funding) and  sustainable and resilient food systems. Introduce a policy framework which supports small  food producers;  } Strengthen customary rights to land and natural resources to protect indigenous people;  } No endorsement of Climate Smart Agriculture as a solution for climate change.  On energy access:  } The commitment to phase-out of fossil fuels and shifting to 100% renewable energy  sources no later than 2050 should also include “sustainable energy access for all”, including  consistent policy and financing support by developed countries;  } Rapid implementation of the new Sustainable Development Goal N. 7 from 2016 onwards  to ensure access to affordable, reliable, safe and sustainable energy services for everyone.  On people and universal rights:  } Explicitly recognise that climate change impacts can jeopardise human rights;  } Establish a safeguard system to prevent social and environmental harm for all climate  actions, including a grievance mechanism and monitoring system for communities and  individuals negatively impacted. Language on human rights protection and fulfilment must  be legally binding;  } Ensure gender equality and full and effective and gender-responsive participation; food  security and the resilience of natural ecosystems, and a just transition that creates decent  work and quality jobs;  } Work towards enabling a radical change in people’s lifestyles towards living simply by  reducing overall energy consumption and making environmentally friendly choices.  Introduction  “The climate is a common good, belonging to all and meant for all. At the global level,  it is a complex system linked to many of the essential conditions for human life. A  very solid scientific consensus indicates that we are presently witnessing a disturbing  warming of the climatic system [...] Humanity is called to recognise the need for changes  of lifestyle, production and consumption, in order to combat this warming or at least  the human causes which produce or aggravate it.”  Pope Francis, Laudato Si’, On Care for Our Common Home (23)  This publication by CIDSE – an international alliance of 17 Catholic development agencies  – sets out a vision for the UN conference in Paris,i and beyond, and is directly inspired by  Laudato Si’, Pope Francis’ Encyclical Letter on Care for Our Common Home. Six years after  the Copenhagen summit – widely seen as a failure – this marks another historic moment for  world’s leaders to seize the opportunity to agree on concrete, ambitious and fair solutions to  address these challenges. CIDSE actively follows the negotiations with the wider civil society  network and has identified key issues, crucial for Paris. These relate to: long-term goal, climate  finance, agriculture, human rights and energy transition.  The Papal Encyclical calls on governments to integrate all political decisions within a moral  and ethical dimension putting at the centre the poorest communities who are suffering the  most from climate change impacts. CIDSE is calling to move towards a just, equitable and  sustainable use and distribution of global resources by citizens of the world. Addressing the  global over-exploitation of finite natural resources requires limits to overall consumption.  Economic paradigms need reshaping in order to uphold human creativity, social inclusion,  gender equality and democratic political culture. New models of development would ensure  access to clean and safe energy, food, water, healthcare and education.  As Pope Francis says: we are one human family, sharing all of Creation, globally interdependent  and “faced not with two separate crises, one environmental and the other social, but rather  with one complex crisis which is both social and environmental. Strategies for a solution  demand an integrated approach to combating poverty, restoring dignity to the excluded, and  at the same time protecting nature.” (139)  We need to combine our calls towards policy makers with a change coming from individuals.  This call for a paradigm shift is reflected in the CIDSE campaign, Change for the Planet – Care  for the People, whose aim is to spark and enable a radical change in people’s lifestyles towards  living simply by reducing overall energy consumption and making environmentally friendly  food choices. People-led initiatives are blossoming world-wide and demonstrate that people  are willing to make the changes that politicians are still afraid to call for.ii  i From 30 November to 11 December 2015, the 21st Conference of the Parties (COP21) of the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) will take place in Paris, France; this will be the  culmination of a one year round of negotiations in which countries were asked to reach a common agreement  on different aspects related to climate change.  ii CIDSE is also supporting the People’s Test on Climate, which sets collective expectations for Paris, being:  an urgent and drastic reduction in greenhouse gas emissions; provide adequate support for transformation;  deliver justice for impacted people; focus on transformational action.  6 Paris, for the People and the Planet  Climate change and the mounting “ecological crisis,” together with poverty and inequality,  are central challenges of our times. There is a clear interconnection between social and  environmental justice. The ecological crisis reveals the systemic failures of a political and  economic order driven by vested interests and the exclusive focus on market-based solutions  and profit, which has failed to put the human being and the common good at the heart of  the economy. We need to put an end to the current growth and development paradigm of  unequal economic, social and political systems, unequal distribution and access to resources  like water and land, leading to human rights violations, environmental and social degradation  and conflicts.  Based on the vision of the Papal Encyclical, we hope the UN conference in Paris will help kick  start a process to:  } Bring transformative and systemic change to tackle the root causes of today’s social and  ecological crisis. This means moving away from fossil fuels and extractivist models of  development and transitioning into a world that ensures the planet and humanity’s survival  by keeping temperatures rise below 1.5°C. We need to move towards development models  that foster participation, equity, equality and justice for the most affected people;  } Spark and enable in others, as in ourselves, a radical change in lifestyles and values, an  ecological conversion that allows us to reduce overall energy consumption; privilege the  use of renewable energy resources and make environmentally conscious food choices that  minimise environmental impacts and allow producers to gain fair livelihoods;  } Support existing solutions that work: from small producers practicing agroecology to  guarantee food sovereignty, to communities developing decentralised management of  renewable sources of energy to ensure fair access to clean energy; and community-driven  projects that promote a culture of care and global solidarity;  } Agree on a fair, ambitious, binding and transformative agreement, one that thoroughly  addresses the ecological debt owed to present and future generations; one that enhances the  decarbonisation of our societies to secure a safe, fair and clean future; one that addresses  how societies will mitigate and adapt to the effects of climate change and one that places  the respect of human rights above particular interests. We need strong commitments that will  ensure social and environmental justice for all, putting people and planet first.  We cannot overlook the deep historical inequalities, but must confront the lack of equity  between North and South. The onus cannot only be on those who have never had.  There is no time to wait anymore. It’s not about “more”, it’s about better, just and fairer for all.  It’s about justice!  1. Shared vision and  the temperature goal  “The myopia of power politics delays the inclusion of a far-sighted environmental  agenda within the overall agenda of governments. Thus we forget that ‘time is greater  than space’, that we are always more effective when we generate processes rather than  holding on to positions of power. True statecraft is manifest when, in difficult times, we  uphold high principles and think of the long-term common good.”  Pope Francis, Laudato Si’, On Care for Our Common Home (178)  A changing climate is already impacting lives,  livelihoods, health, ecosystems, economies,  food security, amplifying existing risks  and creating new ones. The poorest and  most vulnerable communities are being  hit hardest, as they have limited capacity  to adapt. Climate change risks pushing  people and communities back into poverty,  undoing decades of development gains.  According to the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change (IPCC): “People who are  socially, economically, culturally, politically,  institutionally, or otherwise marginalised are  especially vulnerable to climate change.”The Copenhagen Accord says that “the  increase in global temperature should be  below 2°C [compared to pre-industrial  levels]”6 and this is now the temperature  threshold for the international United  Nations Framework Convention on Climate  Change (UNFCCC) negotiations. However,  a recent expert report found that, in some  regions and vulnerable ecosystems, high  risks are projected for warming above  1.5°C.7 Limiting global warming to 2°C is not  sufficient to protect the poorest and most  vulnerable people. Anything above 1.5°C  could result in extreme losses that countries  and communities are unable to adapt to. For  the Least Developed Countries (LDCs)8 and  the Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS)where impacts are already felt most severely,  a 1.5°C target is a matter of survival.10 Over  100 countries worldwide are calling for it to  be included in the Paris agreement for the  sake of present and future generations.  The 2°C target is essentially a “political” targetthat would allow for social and economic  inequalities that exist independently of  the climate crisis to get worse. For CIDSE  the target also needs to act as a catalyst  for transformative change moving beyond  “business as usual”, towards a just, equitable  and sustainable use and distribution of global  resources by citizens of the world. This is also  a clear message from the Papal Encyclical “we  have to realise that a true ecological approach  always becomes a social approach; it must  integrate questions of justice in debates on the  environment, so as to hear both the cry of the  earth and the cry of the poor.”12 (49)  This means those who are historically most  responsible and have a higher capacity to  act than others due to their high income and  wealth, level of development and access to  technologies should shoulder majority of  the burden. Failure to stay within a 1.5°C  limit would also require greater commitment  in terms of finance, technological and  knowledge support from developed countries  to assist those countries most at risk to climate  change. The Potsdam Institute for Climate  Impact Research (PIK) found that “actions  for returning global warming to below 1.5°C  by 2100 are in many ways similar to those  limiting warming to below 2°C” but that “the  more ambitious 1.5°C goal leaves no space  to further delay global mitigation action and  emission reductions need to scale up swiftly  in the next decades.”The IPCC concluded that to have at least a  50% chance of staying below 1.5°C, cuts in  global CO2 emissions in the order of 70-95%  below 2010 levels by 2050 are needed.14 This  requires eliminating fossil fuels as soon as  possible, and no later than 2050.  8 Paris, for the People and the Planet  According to Pope Francis: “We know  that technology based on the use of highly  polluting fossil fuels – especially coal, but also  oil and, to a lesser degree, gas – needs to be  progressively replaced without delay.”Yet fossil fuel extraction and production  currently still receive trillions of dollars in  subsidies from governments every year.  According to the International Monetary  Fund’s (IMF) latest findings16, these subsidies  amount to US$1,000 a year for every citizen  living in the G20 group of the world’s leading  economies, despite the G20’s pledge in 2009to phase out support for coal, oil and gas.  CIDSE is calling for:  } Phasing out all fossil fuel emissions and  moving towards a 100% renewable energy  future with sustainable energy access for all  as early as possible (no later than 2050);  } Ensuring that the 1.5°C threshold is enshrined  in a legally binding global agreement,  with ambitious mitigation commitments  and actions from all countries, depending  on their common but differentiated  responsibilities and respective capabilities  (CBDRRC);  } Complete decarbonisation by 2050;  } Five-year reviews of pledges and ambition  to confirm emission pathways are in line  with the principle of equity, the latest  science and the long term temperature  and decarbonisation goal. The periodic  review should also identify gaps and ensure  additional action, where country pledges  do not fulfil the principle of common  and individual responsibilities under the  Paris Climate agreement and the UNFCCC.  Countries must equally be held to account  where their commitments are inconsistent  with their national action plans.  Deep cuts in domestic greenhouse gas  emissions in developed countries are  needed to pay the “ecological debt” owed to  poorer countries, as part of a just approach  to tackling the global climate crisis based  on intergenerational equity. This includes  the delivery of adequate, predictable and  timely international climate finance to help  developing countries. This requires that  developed countries meet their commitment  to provide US$100 billion dollars per year by  2020, agreed in Copenhagen in 2009. This is  the foundation of a just climate settlement  and will build the trust necessary to secure  a strong outcome in Paris that facilitates  ambitious climate action on the ground.  We consider this a form of reparation for the  damage caused historically by industrialised  countries, mainly through the burning of fossil  fuels, which still receive trillions of dollars  of subsidies from governments each year. A  “finance package” should cover both the pre-  2020 and the post-2020 periods. In Laudato  Si’ the Pope writes “developed countries ought  to help pay this debt by significantly limiting  their consumption of non-renewable energy  and by assisting poorer countries to support  policies and programmes of sustainable  development…...We must continue to be  aware that, regarding climate change, there  are differentiated responsibilities.” (52)  2. Ecological debt and  climate finance  “A true “ecological debt” exists, particularly between the global north and south,  connected to commercial imbalances with effects on the environment, and the  disproportionate use of natural resources by certain countries over long periods of  time.”  Pope Francis, Laudato Si’, On Care for Our Common Home (51)  Delivery of climate finance needs to adhere  to the “do no harm” principle (see below) and  not provide support for polluting fossil fuel  projects or false solutions such as “climate  smart agriculture”18 (see section 3). Climate  finance should ensure that investments do  not make the poorest and most vulnerable  worse off and aim to maximise social and  environmental co-benefits.19 This could  involve investing in access to sustainable  energy services for the poorest, forest  protection and building institutional and  human capacity in developing countries  to ensure that climate change planning is  socially inclusive and pro-poor.  Local communities on the frontlines of  climate change must participate in decision-making  over the financing of adaptation and  mitigation initiatives in the global South.  Transparent monitoring and reporting of  climate finance flows will ensure public  accountability. It will also uphold the Cancun  agreement that “Parties should, in all climate  change-related actions, fully respect human  rights.” Since climate change impacts, as well  as adaptation and mitigation projects aimed  at addressing them, can have differentiated  impacts on men and women (as underlined  by the IPCC 5th Assessment), climate finance  provision must be gender-sensitive.  Climate finance should support countries’  right to development by funding low-carbon  and climate-resilient development strategies  which are in line with recipient countries’ and  its citizens development priorities in order to  maximise effectiveness.  Finally, current levels of public finance are  far below what is needed20, and adaptation in  particular remains under-funded.21 Developed  countries may deploy a range of instruments,channels and actors to meet the US$100  billion goal. Funding from public budgets will  have to increase significantly and any private  sector finance must be complementary to  rather than a substitute for public sector  finance, especially for funding adaptation.  Predictable public finance for adaptation is  essential for developing countries to deal with  the unavoidable impacts of climate change.  All climate finance, whether public or private,  should be held to the same accounting  and transparency rules and have strong  environmental and human rights standards  and safeguards, accountability mechanisms  and evaluation of results.  CIDSE is calling for:  } Developed countries to provide a plan  and timeline on how they intend to ramp  up support to developing countries in line  with meeting the US$100 billion goal. This  should include qualitative and quantitative  information on actors, channels, sources  and instruments to deliver predictable and  scaled-up funds between now and 2020,  demonstrating how the balance between  adaptation and mitigation finance will  address the adaptation gap;  } Developed countries pledges to include  increased public finance, particularly for  adaptation needs, up to 2020 and beyond;  } Not limiting the focus of countries’ climate  finance pledges to creating ‘enabling  environments’ in developing countries to  attract new investments and leveraging  private sector finance;  } Including five-year reviews of climate  finance to prevent double-counting with  existing Official Development Assistance  (ODA) commitments. Separate targets  should be set for adaptation and for  mitigation finance, informed by the needs  of recipient countries;  } Including (through a COP decision) a  commitment to improve the balance  between the allocation of climate finance to  mitigation and adaptation, aiming to reach  50:50 by 2020. The Paris climate agreement  must include a 50% public climate finance  floor for adaptation so that all countries  make the same commitment;  } Closing the loophole for climate finance  to fund polluting fossil fuel projects.  Institutions at national, regional and global  level – Multilateral Development Banks,  national development agencies, export  credit agencies and the new Green Climate  Fund – should shift all forms of support  away from fossil fuels to renewable energy  and energy efficiency that can support low  carbon development;  10 Paris, for the People and the Planet  } Ensuring robust and transparent accounting  for climate finance: common reporting  frameworks for emission reduction  commitments, development assistance  and climate finance are needed to ensure  commitments can be compared, and to  track progress. Only finance with climate  action as a principal objective should be  counted as climate finance  } Ensuring climate investments “do-no-harm”  and are socially inclusive and gender  sensitive by mandating public participation in  decision-making over projects funded, as well  as monitoring and evaluation frameworks.  Investment criteria should ensure finance  does not damage local eco-systems, local  communities, violate human rights or lead  to negative impacts such as the further  impoverishment of vulnerable and poor  groups. All climate finance should be gender-sensitive  and promote gender equality.  iii Corresponding to the OECD DAC Rio Marker 2.  3. Climate and  agriculture nexus  “ [...] there is a great variety of small-scale food production systems which feed the greater  part of the world’s peoples, using a modest amount of land and producing less waste, be  it in small agricultural parcels, in orchards and gardens, hunting and wild harvesting  or local fishing. Economies of scale, especially in the agricultural sector, end up forcing  smallholders to sell their land or to abandon their traditional crops […]”  Pope Francis, Laudato Si’, On Care for Our Common Home (129)  Climate change, agriculture and food security  are inextricably linked, and addressing  existing global hunger while preparing to  feed an increasing population in the context  of a changing climate is a defining challenge  of our times. Agriculture is a key sector, both  in terms of the emissions the sector itself  generates and the detrimental impacts on  rural communities as a result of increased  weather variability and loss of resources.  Therefore the Paris agreement must facilitate  an enabling policy framework that supports  rather than undermine “agroecological”  approaches, ensuring secure access to natural  resources and avoiding ‘false solutions’.  Agricultural activities, including the  indirect consequences of land use change,  deforestation and transport, account for  one third of total greenhouse gas (GHG)  emissions.23 The contribution of agricultural  production to GHG emissions is significant  but a distinction between industrial and small-scale  food production needs to be made.  Whilst food production is widely blamed  for generating the lion’s share (80-86%)24 of  GHG emissions related to the food system,  emissions which result from activities beyond  the farm gate account for approximately half  of food chain emissions.25 In addition, middle-income  countries will likely follow this trend  in the future26 primarily due to an increase in  industrialisation and standardisation of food  systems.  At the same time the agricultural sector is  particularly affected by climate change and  measures to help vulnerable communities to  adapt will be needed in order to face climate-related  challenges such as desertification,  land degradation, drought, floods and  water scarcity. A range of adverse effects  of climate change, most notably on small  scale farming have raised income inequality,  reduced household wealth, undermined  food security and have affected women  disproportionately.27 In developing countries,  these risks are greatly exacerbated by low  levels of investment in small scale farmers,  low access to technology, reliance on rain-fed  agriculture, and high levels of pre-existing  food insecurity and poverty. It is estimated  that by 2080, 600 million people will suffer  from hunger and malnutrition due to climate  change.Nevertheless, smallholder farmers can be very  efficient in terms of production per hectare  and have a huge potential for ensuring food  security and realising the right to food while  improving the resilience of food systems. They  manage over 80% of the world’s estimated  500 million small farms and provide over 80%  of the food consumed in a large part of the  developing world, contributing significantly to  poverty reduction and food security.29 Thus it  is important that the principle of common but  differentiated responsibilities and respective  capabilities should be respected: the burden  of mitigating emissions should not be solely  placed on developing countries or on the  shoulders of small-scale food producers. The  new climate agreement must protect the right  to food and promote more sustainable ways  of producing, distributing, transforming and  consuming food.  To be able to keep global temperature rise  below 1.5°C, we urgently need to begin a  transition toward a sustainable, low-carbon  society. This will require radical changes in our  methods of production and our consumption  habits, particularly in the agriculture sector.  CIDSE promotes agroecology – which  enhances agricultural systems by using and  recycling natural resources and shifting  away from the use of fossil fuels – as the  only holistic approach to agriculture, based  on practices and principles that are truly  productive in the face of climate change.  Agroecological practices also greatly improve  organic matter (carbon) in the soil and largely  eliminate the need for long distant transport,  freezing and processing and serve to prevent  deforestation.v  However, other multi-stakeholders initiatives  such as the Global Alliance for Climate  Smart Agriculture31 are gaining ground. Far  from being a new, ‘revolutionary’ concept  addressing both agriculture and climate change  issues, climate smart agriculture appears to  be another form of “green-washing”. The  Alliance, dominated by private interests, lacks  in monitoring and accountability tools, in  social and environmental safeguards and in  the representation of developing countries.In order to truly tackle the structural causes  of climate change, a clear choice needs to be  made between different sets of technologies,  models and practices33 in order to avoid  promoting false solutions dangerous for  people and the planet.  CIDSE is calling for:  } Making explicit reference to the impact  of climate change on food security in  the operative section of the core Paris  agreement  } Ensuring that climate action does not have  negative impacts on food security  } Mitigation of emissions in the land sector  must not result in less ambition in other  sectors to avoid compensation or a zero net  emissions goal approach;  } Designing the new climate agreement  in a way that supports and promotes  agroecology and sustainable and resilient  food systems while ensuring that vulnerable  people have access to natural resources and  are empowered in their ability to adapt to  climate change;  iv Also known as CBDRRC.  v Soil carbon sequestration can be brought about by good agricultural management (e.g. restoring soils  and tackling fossil fuel dependency through agroecological methods). However, sequestration should  be considered an additional benefit, and land use activities should not be considered a primary goal of  adaptation and mitigation policies and strategies. Nor should it be considered as a way to further develop  carbon market mechanisms just like it has been done in the forest sector.  vi Paragraph 15 under section C.  vii CIDSE joins the call by several civil society groups to include in the Paris text the following language:  “Parties shall, when pursuing actions in the land sector in addition to actions in other sectors and consistent  with all relevant international obligations, prioritise the protection, maintenance and restoration of natural  ecosystems; undertake emissions reductions and removals in an equitable manner; and the governing body  shall develop principles and guidelines for ensuring social protections, food security, ecological integrity,  transparency and comparability in relation to such actions”.  12 Paris, for the People and the Planet  } Not endorsing Climate Smart Agriculture  as a solution for climate change. The “Lima  Paris Action Agenda of Solutions”viii for  COP21, aiming to highlight non-State action  to reach an ambitious agreement in 2015,  should not include projects labelled Climate  Smart Agriculture;  } Allocating adequate funds for truly  sustainable agricultural programmes  in developing countries through public  investments, including the US$ 100 billion  commitment to the Green Climate Fund (GCF);  } Introducing a policy framework which  supports – instead of weakens – the practices  of small food producers such as open-pollinated  seed varieties, crop diversity and  low-input agricultural practices”;ix  } Strengthening customary rights to land and  natural resources to protect indigenous  people, and applying Free Prior and Informed  Consent (FPIC) principles to them.x    4. Energy transition and  ending poverty  “There is an urgent need to develop policies so that, in the next few years, the emission of  carbon dioxide and other highly polluting gases can be drastically reduced, for example,  substituting for fossil fuels and developing sources of renewable energy. Worldwide there  is minimal access to clean and renewable energy.”  Pope Francis, Laudato Si’, On Care for Our Common Home (26)  Our current energy system is not meeting the  needs of billions of people around the world  who lack access to modern energy services:  1.1 billion have no access to electricity while  2.8 billion cook with polluting fuels.34 95% of  the energy poor people live in developing Asia  and Sub-Saharan Africa, mostly in rural areas  that are not connected to the grid. The most  cost-effective and reliable way of providing  them with access is often decentralised  (off-grid, largely renewable) energy. This is  particularly true of electricity. In sub-Saharan  Africa, in particular, grid electrification is not  keeping up with population growth.  Globally, there has also been very little  progress on clean cooking access. Investing  in clean and efficient cooking solutions is also  critical to prevent the negative health impacts  of indoor air pollution from using traditional  fuels − particularly on women and girls.  Investing in sustainable energy and energy  efficiency globally is crucial to protect the  climate and also the poorest who are most  vulnerable to climate change impacts. With  sufficient and appropriate support, poorer  countries could ‘leapfrog’ to a cleaner,  more affordable and more inclusive energy  pathways for development.  Pope Francis’ Encyclical Laudato Si’ calls for  an urgent transition away from polluting fossil  fuels to renewable energy. This should be  available to everyone, including the poorest.  Richer countries should take responsibility  by supporting poorer countries to make the  energy shift through financing, technology  transfer and technical assistance. Maximising  energy efficiency is a key building block of  the energy shift, it adds.  CIDSE is calling for:  } The commitment to phase-out of fossil fuels  and shifting to 100% renewables no later  than 2050 should also include “sustainable  energy access for all”, including through  consistent policy and financing support by  developed countries;  } Rapid implementation of the new Sustainable  Development Goal N. 7 from 2016 onwards  to ensure access to affordable, reliable,  safe and sustainable energy services for  everyone and action to decarbonise energy  systems sufficiently by 2030 to keep the  world below 1.5°C of warming.xi  xi This requires indicators that are fit for purpose i.e. “measure what matters”, and sufficient and appropriate  support for implementation, including financing, technical assistance, appropriate technology transfer and  capacity building.  5. Equity and human rights  “We have to realise that a true ecological approach always becomes a social approach; it  must integrate questions of justice in debates on the environment, so as to hear both the  cry of the earth and the cry of the poor”  Pope Francis, Laudato Si’, On Care for Our Common Home (49)  Climate change and the mounting ‘ecological  crisis’, together with poverty and inequality,  are the central challenges of our times. But,  as Pope Francis says, these are not separate  problems: they represent one complex crisis,  both social and environmental. This requires  “an integrated approach to combating  poverty, restoring dignity to the excluded, and  at the same time protecting nature”. (139)  Climate change has the biggest impact on  poor communities in poor countries, which  see their lives disrupted by mega-storms,  droughts or flooding. When these catastrophes  happen in poor regions of the world, it puts  them in an even more difficult situation, as  there are currently no concrete adaptation  plans. For example, almost one billion people  do not have access to sufficient food to live  well and climate change is expected to further  threaten food production and food security.  As a result of this instability, numerous human  rights are threatened; the right to food, life,  health and development. Climate change also  threatens to reverse progress made in recent  years on healthcare, education, transport and  decent employment. The poorest people,  particularly women, children, and disabled  people in rural areas are the most affected  by climate change − they are also the groups  who have contributed least to causing the  problem. Despite this – and despite the huge  resources poured into global discussions  about climate change − the world’s poorest  people have no say or representation in  public decision-making.  The ecological crisis reveals the systemic  failures of a political and economic order  driven by vested interests and the exclusive  focus on market-based solutions, which has  failed to put the common good at the heart  of the economy. We need to challenge the  current growth and development paradigm.  This is based on unequal economic, social  and political systems, unequal distribution  and access to resources like water and  land, leading to human rights violations,  environmental and social degradation and  conflicts.  14 Paris, for the People and the Planet  At its root then, the ecological crisis is not  just an economic and an environmental issue  but a moral one. Inspired by Catholic Social  Teaching, CIDSE has always considered issues  such as climate change from the viewpoint of  entire humanity, to provide a moral compass  that motivates people everywhere to do the  right thing and think about how their choices  are impacting on the poorest and most  vulnerable.  For CIDSE, this is about people, and our  capacity as humanity to secure safe and  dignified lives for all. It is a demand that  comes from communities and people at the  frontlines. Keeping temperatures down below  the 1.5°C threshold also means ensuring  communities are given adequate support as  indigenous and other unique human systems  will face increasingly higher risks of losing  their land, their cultural and natural heritage,  community cohesion, sense of place, and  identity.  Pope Francis’ concept of “ecological debt”,  mentioned in section 2, means that these deep  historical inequalities cannot be overlooked  within the climate negotiations. The lack  of equity between the North and the South  must be addressed. “Inequity affects not only  individuals but entire countries; it compels  us to consider an ethics of international  relations.” (51)  Equity for CIDSE is not only about how to  share the effort35 (emissions reductions and  support) amongst countries in a fair way. It is  also about building a transformative agenda  for social justice and human rights. On this  collective journey we need to understand how  to challenge the ever rising inequality and  to insist on a pro-people agenda of decent  wages, universal services, social protection,  and on narrowing the gap between rich and  poor. And most of all ensure we leave a safer,  fairer and cleaner world to future generations.  “Intergenerational solidarity is not optional,  but rather a basic question of justice, since  the world we have received also belongs to  those who will follow us.” (159)  The UN Human Rights Council and the Office  of the High Commissioner for Human Rights  have repeatedly and emphatically highlighted  the adverse effects of climate change on  human rights. Echoing the Council resolution,  Parties to the UNFCCC emphasised the  importance of respecting human rights in all  climate related actions as part of the Cancun  Agreement in 2010, stating that “Parties  should, in all climate change-related actions,  fully respect human rights.”xii  Experience with climate finance projects –  especially the Clean Development Mechanism  (CDM) – has shown a policy gap in protecting  human rights in climate policy. While  mostly well intentioned, some projects have  harmed the environment and people – even  infringing on rights to life, health, food, water  and sanitation, housing, and culture, among  others.36 A closer look at the instruments  established under the UNFCCC to address  climate change reveals that so far, the Cancun  mandate has been weakly operationalised  and enforced.xiii  In Laudato Si’, Pope Francis points to the  interconnected social and environmental  crises affecting our ‘common home’ and the  intimate relationship between the poor and  the fragility of the planet.  xii 1/CP.16, paragraph 8: The Human Rights Council stated in 2009 that “climate change-related impacts have a  range of implications, both direct and indirect, for the effective enjoyment of human rights.”  xiii The recognition of existing human rights obligations is critical if safeguards and accountability measures are  to be established for all climate actions, democratisation of the decision-making process as well as full and  effective participation in design and implementation of measures to address climate change.  CIDSE is calling for:  } Specifying how existing human rights  obligations apply in the context of climate  change and explicitly recognising that  climate change impacts can jeopardise  human rights;  } Language on human rights protection and  fulfilment must be legally binding; xiv  } Establishing a safeguard system to prevent  social and environmental harm, applicable  to all climate actions. This would include  a grievance mechanism and monitoring  system for communities and individuals  negatively impacted by climate actions;  } In all climate change related actions human  rights should be respected, protected,  promoted and fulfilled for all, including the  most marginalised and vulnerable. Gender  equality and full and effective and gender-responsive  participation should be ensured;  food security and the resilience of natural  ecosystems should be protected; the need  for a just transition that creates decent work  and quality jobs should be included;  } The 1.5°C threshold is vital and adequate  climate action will remain unachievable  without taking principles of equity  (intragenerational and intergenerational),  common but differentiated responsibilities  and respective capabilities (CBDRRC),  historical responsibilities, and the right to  sustainable development fully into account.  xiv and most appropriately fits in the operative section of the core of the agreement. We join the call by  several civil society groups to include the following language: “All Parties shall, in all climate change related  actions, respect, protect, promote, and fulfil human rights for all, including the rights of indigenous peoples;  be guided by gender equality and ensure full and effective and gender-responsive participation; promote  food security and the protection and resilience of natural ecosystems; and consider a just transition of the  workforce that creates decent work and quality jobs.”  6. Change for the Planet –  Care for the People  Reflecting on the work CIDSE carries out  with its member organisations towards  social justice, the campaign Change for the  Planet – Care for the People aims to promote  sustainable ways of living. The global overexploitation  of natural resources puts people  and planet at risk and it starts with vulnerable  people living in poverty.  Inspired by Pope Francis’ Encyclical Letter  Laudato Si’, which states: “Every effort  to protect and improve our world entails  profound changes in lifestyles, models of  production and consumption, and the  established structures of power which today  govern societies” (5), we are convinced that  “a change in lifestyle could bring healthy  pressure to bear on those who wield political,  economic and social power.” (206)  The campaign calls for a radical change in  people’s lifestyles towards living simply by  reducing overall energy consumption and  making environmentally friendly food choices.  This can be done by limiting consumption to  sustainably-produced local foods that minimise  environmental impact, allow producers to gain  fair livelihoods, do not violate human rights,  and are also affordable.  On food consumption and production, the  campaign encourages people to become  “food citizens,” engaging in behaviours that  support the development of a democratic,  socially and economically just and  environmentally sustainable food system. The  campaign encourages people to re-gain food  preparation preservation and conservation  skills, as well as gaining knowledge on food  production (e.g. knowing your farmer, being  aware of seasonality).  16 Paris, for the People and the Planet  The lifestyle challenges include:  } Participating in food production to the  extent that you can (e.g. if you have a  space, grow your own food / make a little  compost). Only by growing some food for  yourself can you become acquainted with  the beautiful energy cycle that revolves  from soil to seed to flower to fruit to food  to offal to decay, and around again;  } Preparing your own meals. This should also  enable you to eat more cheaply and it will  give you a measure of “quality control”: you  will have some reliable knowledge of what  has been added to the food you eat;  } Buying local food. The locally produced  seasonal food supply is the most secure and  fresh option and it uses the least energy in  production, while being easiest for local  consumers to understand and influence.  On energy consumption and production,  the campaign encourages individuals to  become aware of their energy consumption  and supply. We encourage individuals to reconsider  the amount of energy really needed,  to prioritise community actions aiming to  share energy costs and to invest in renewable  sources for energy production.  The lifestyle challenges include:  } Cut down the amount of energy you use.  Avoid leaving appliances on stand-by, install  energy-saving bulbs, choose appliances  with the highest rating (AAA) on the energy  label and insulate your home or install  double-glazing;  } Phase out fossil fuel use. In order to limit  global warming and its dangerous social  impacts, we should limit natural gas, oil and  coal usage and favour renewable energy  sources such as wind or solar power.  Our commitment – together with several  successful models of sustainable living that  already exist – demonstrates that society is  ready and asking for far-reaching change in  policy and practice. In this way, Change for  the Planet – Care for the People wants to join  the thousands of people that will mobilise  around the COP21 in Paris and all around the  world calling for system change in order to  prevent further climate change. A difference  can be made if acting together.  Conclusion  At many times in history, the international community has proven it can overcome divisions in  a common effort to respond to significant threats and pursue a world of peace, environmental,  climate, economic and social justice, and gender equality. Now is one of those moments.xv  For example, over the past four years we have seen unprecedented levels of discussion,  consultation and mobilisation in the preparation of the new global Sustainable Development  Goals (SDGs). These rightly propose a universal agenda, aiming to tackle both poverty and  climate change.  Yet there are gaps and inconsistencies linking these discussions within the Paris agreement:  for example continued competition for limited natural resources which can lead to further  rises in greenhouse gas emissions without tackling inequality and poverty is contradictory.  The current SDG agreement does not cover issues such as the unjust global rules of finance,  taxation, trade and investment, all essential to realise the structural transformation needed to  address the root causes of poverty and inequality. The Paris Agreement also risks suffering  from a number of shortcomings and contradictions on climate finance, human rights, and the  right to food.  As the world moves forward with the implementation of the SDGs and the Paris Agreement,  the major contradictions inherent in these processes will have to be tackled. CIDSE’s proposals  − based on Pope Francis’ ground-breaking Encyclical Letter − can hopefully provide useful a  roadmap on how to bring systemic and transformational change within the Paris Agreement  negotiations and beyond.  18 Paris, for the People and the Planet