report 5th edition 2015 world energy scenario  energy  [r]evolution  a sustainable world energy outlook 2015  100% renewable energy for all  2  image solon ag Photovoltaics facility in arnstein oPerates 1,500 horizontal and vertical solar “Movers”. it is the largest tracking solar facility in the  world, and delivers 12 Megawatt of energy. each “Mover” can be bought froM s.a.g. solarstroM ag as a Private investMent.  the global energy  [r]evolution series presents  us with a compelling vision  of what an energy future  would look like for a  sustainable world. the  scenarios proposed by the  energy [r]evolution have in  a short period of time gained  a reputation for the insight  and explanations they  provide decision makers.  this fifth edition outlines an  updated and well-articulated  pathway to achieve the  transition to a global  sustainable energy future.  the international renewable  energy agency  (irena) welcomes the  recognition of the central role  that renewable energy will play  in this new energy paradigm.    Achieving this transition relies upon addressing key energy  issues such as access to modern energy services, security of  supply and the sustainability of the energy mix. Environmental  degradation, increasing energy demand and unsustainable  resource use are critical development challenges that require  a coherent response. Renewable energy presents an  opportunity as it will play an essential role in advancing  sustainable development by providing millions with access to  energy, whilst helping ensure energy security, mitigating the  existential risk of climate change by reducing emissions, and  generating growth and employment.  The benefits associated with renewables are influencing how  countries meet their energy needs; the global increase in  renewable energy policies and investment attests to this. This  growth in the uptake of renewable energy - the “Silent  Revolution” - is playing out across the globe: over the last  decade 553,000 MW of renewable energy capacity has been  installed, with global total investment reaching a record $ 270  billion in 2014, and the cost of modern renewable energy  technologies continues to fall.  Accelerating the “Silent Revolution” globally requires  greater levels of commitment and cooperation to develop  enabling policy, combined with practical business  solutions. To facilitate this, policy makers, scientists and  businesses require access to up-to-date, relevant and  reliable data. Scenarios are a helpful aid for decision  making, by mapping out the complex issues and  information that must be considered. Through its  investigation of issues surrounding the future of energy, the  Global Energy [R]evolution 2015 makes an invaluable  contribution to informing decision-makers worldwide.  The Global Energy [R]evolution publication is an important  complement to IRENA’s efforts to provide knowledge and  expertise, and to facilitate the flow of information  encouraging the deployment of renewables. Therefore,  IRENA welcomes this fourth edition of the Global Energy  [R]evolution scenario, and the contribution the Global Wind  Energy Council, Solar Power Europe and Greenpeace have  made to the vital debate on transitioning the world to a  more secure and sustainable energy future.  Adnan Z. Amin    image northbound and southbound shiPPing lanes off the coast of china’s shandong Peninsula.the lanes forM one of the Main routes froM the yellow  sea into the bohai sea and the chinese Ports of dalian and tianJin, two of the busiest in the world. the vessels in this iMage are Most likely cargo shiPs,  their ProPellers kick uP long, brown sediMent PluMes.  the energy [r]evolution  project marks its first  decade of ambitious  (renewable) energy  scenarios for countries and  regions. the e[r] is now a  well-known and respected  projection for future  renewable energy markets;  it is widely seen as an  alternative view to the iea´s  world energy outlook.  ren21’s renewables  global status report has  become over the past  decade the most frequently  referenced report on  renewable energy market,  industry and policy trends.  similarly, the energy  [r]evolution has provided  regular projections for the  current and future  renewable energy markets.  each edition (five to date  including this one) triggers  important debates within  the energy sector.  contents    Renewable energy continued to grow in 2014 in parallel  with global energy consumption and falling oil prices.  Despite rising energy use, for the first time in 40 years,  global CO2 emissions associated with energy  consumption remained stable over the course of the year  while the global economy grew. The landmark  “decoupling” of economic and CO2 growth is due in large  measure to China’s increased use of renewable  resources, and efforts by countries in the OECD to  promote renewable energy and energy efficiency. This is  particularly encouraging in view of COP21 later this year  in Paris, where countries will announce and/or confirm  actions to mitigate climate change, setting the stage for  future investment in renewables and energy efficiency.  This decoupling clearly signals that renewables have  become a mainstream energy resource. The penetration  and use of both variable and non-variable renewables  are increasing, thereby contributing to diversification of  the energy mix. As of early 2015, 164 countries have  renewable energy targets in place. Many of these  countries have also engaged in an energy transition  path towards renewable energy and energy efficiency.  However, even with these successes, growth in  renewables capacity as well as improvements in energy  efficiency are below the rates necessary to achieve the  Sustainable Energy for All (SE4All) goals of: doubling the  level of renewable energy; doubling the global rate of  improvement in energy efficiency; and providing universal  energy access by 2030.  We are still not on the pathway to 100% renewable energy  globally; a lot remains to be done particularly to increase  the use of renewables in the heating and transport  sectors. This latest edition of the Energy [R]evolution  provides insight of what needs to be done and where  renewable energy markets need to go. REN21 welcomes  the new Energy [R]evolution scenario as an important  contribution to the global energy policy debate. It provides  guidance on where investments need to reduce CO2  emissions below the carbon budget climate scientist have  identified to avoid runaway climate change.  The past decade has set the wheels in motion for a  global energy transition with renewables; it is  accelerating in many parts of the world. With the  implementation of ambitious targets and innovative  policies, renewables can continue to surpass  expectations and create a clean, equitable energy future.  Christine Lins    Introduction  The good news first: the Energy [R]evolution is already  happening! Since the first edition was published in 2005,  costs for wind power and solar photovoltaics (Pv) have  dropped dramatically and markets have grown substantially.  between 2005 and the end of 2014 over 496,000 MW of new  solar and wind power plants have been installed – equal to  the total capacity of all coal and gas power plants in Europe!  In addition 286,000 MW of hydro-, biomass- , concentrated  solar- and geothermal power plants have been installed,  totaling 783,000 MW of new renewable power generation  connected to the grid in the past decade – enough to supply  the current electricity demand of India and Africa combined.  Renewable power generation has become mainstream in  recent years. Onshore wind is already the most economic  power source for new capacity in a large and growing number  of markets, while solar Pv is likely to follow within the next 3  to 5 years. utilities in Europe, North America and around the  globe are feeling the pressure from renewables, and the old  business models are starting to erode. . In Germany, where  the capacity of solar Pv and wind power is equal to peak  demand, utilities like RWE and E.on struggle. More and more  customers generate their own power. The future business  model for utilities will have to change from selling kilowatthours  to selling energy services if they are to survive.  However, with all the good news from the renewable power  sector, the overall transition away from fossil and nuclear  fuels to renewables is far too slow to combat dangerous  climate change. During the past decade almost as much  capacity of new coal power plants has been installed as  renewables: 750,000 MW. Over 80% of the new capacity has  been added in China, where not only wind and solar power  lead their respective global markets, but also new coal.  but there are the first positive signs that the increase in coal  use is coming to an end in China. The amount of coal being  burned by China has fallen for the first time this century in  2014, according to an analysis of official statistics. China’s  booming coal in the last decade has been the major  contributor to the fast-rising carbon emissions that drive  climate change, making the first drop a significant moment.  100% renewables – a revolutionary idea gets more  and more support  Phasing out nuclear and fossil fuels entirely is still a  revolutionary idea and many energy experts are skeptical.  However, more and more scientists, engineers and activists  actively promote a 100% renewable energy vision. According  to the IPCC’s latest assessment report, we have already used  almost 2/3 of our carbon budget, if we are to have a  reasonable chance of limiting global mean temperature rise to  2 degrees C. At the current and projected rate of  consumption, this entire budget will be used by 2040. So it is  essential that we move rapidly towards a new form of energy  supply – one that delivers 100% renewable energy by 2050.  Greenpeace and its renewable industry association partners  have been researching and presenting Energy [R]evolution  scenarios since 2005, and more recently has started  collaborating with the scientific community. While our  predictions on the potential and market growth of renewable  energy may have seemed fanciful or unrealistic, they have  9  proved to be accurate.1 The 2015 edition of the global Energy  [R]evolution features: 1) a 100% renewable energy scenario  for the first time; 2) a basic Energy [R]evolution case with a  final energy share of 83% renewables which follows the  pathway for the E[R] published in 2012; and 3) and the IEA´s  World Energy Outlook 2014 Current Policies scenario  extrapolated out to 2050- which serves as a reference case.  the transport [r]evolution has not really started yet  While the transition towards 100% renewables in the  “traditional” power and heating sector seems well within our  grasp, the phase-out of fossil fuels in the transport- and parts  of the industry sector are still present major challenges,  especially air travel and transport. Oil dominates the global  transport system and a switch from combustion engines to  electric drives is not possible for example for airplans.. The  “transport revolution” is not simply a technology change; it  requires new mobility concepts and the auto industry need to  change just like utilities, from selling a product – such as cars  – to selling mobility services. Increased shares of e-mobility will  increase the overall power demand significantly, adding more  pressure on utilities to provide more electricity while phasing  out coal and nuclear power plants. Electric mobility must go  hand in hand with renewable energy expansion, as an electric  car supplied by coal power plant would emit nearly as much if  not more CO2 than an efficient one with a combustion engine.  new fossil fuels – a high-risk investment  The Energy [R]evolution scenario provides a pathway to phaseout  the use of oil roughly at the pace of the depletion rates of  existing oil fields. However, while we grapple with meeting the  climate challenge, companies and governments are spending  billions to develop new oil production which we cannot use. The  financial community is waking up to the risks associated with not  only investments in new production which may become  ‘stranded assets’, but the risks to the value of the existing  reserves carried by fossil fuel companies (and governments, for  that matter). The bank of England2 and others have started to  assess the risk to the global economy from potentially wiping  trillions of dollars’ worth of ‘unburnable carbon’ assets off the  balance sheets of fossil fuel companies. viewed in this context,  environmentally and economically risky projects to develop new  oil and gas fields in the Arctic, or in deep waters off brazil and in  the Gulf of Mexico, are high stakes gambles risking not only our  future but the stability of the global economy as well.  While road and rail transport for people will move step by step  toward electric drives, heavy duty fright will replace oil with  synfuels, hydrogen or bio mass. Aviation and shipping will have  to rely on fuels for the foreseeable future – and these fuels  need to come from renewable energies as well. Due to strict  sustainability criteria for biomass, the Energy [R]evolution  scenario only uses a very limited amount which needs to be  used wisely. Thus bio mass will be used mainly for aviation,  shipping (in combination with fuel saving concepts like second  generation wind drives) and to provide industrial process heat.  education – the fuel of the future  A 100% renewable energy supply requires changes in all sectors  and it is not just a technology switch, but goes hand in hand with  development of new business concepts and policies which  support them. New, lighter and sustainable materials, and  software development for better integrated “system thinking”  requires continuous research and education. New electricity and  energy market designs at both the wholesale and retail level will  be required to send the right price signals. New jobs will be  created while others will disappear. Investment in universities and  Schools pays of better than investments in fossil fuel projects.  just transition – don´t leave the workers behind  Currently there are almost 10 million workers in the global coal  industry, and our calculations show that the solar photovoltaic  industry could employ the same number of workers in only 15  years from now. The wind industry could grow by a factor of 10  from the current 700,000 employees to over 7 million by 2030  – twice as many as in the global oil- and gas industry today.  However, this transition will have to be organized and training  programs are needed to educate new workers and maintain  social stability for energy workers as a whole. Even the 100%  Energy [R]evolution scenario still requires 2 million coal  workers in 2030 -there is a still a generation to organize the  shift so no-one is left behind. but the transition must start now.  barriers towards 100% renewables? the lack of  consistent climate and energy policies!  A shift towards 100% renewables is possible within one  generation. A baby born in 2015 can witness a fossil fuel free  world by the age of 35 – but climate and energy policies  globally need to pave the way away from climate chaos  towards a sustainable energy supply for all.  The upcoming uNfCCC climate conference in Paris needs to  deliver mandatory policies for all countries. This could  establish the basis of a truly sustainable energy future.    SOLAR POWER EuROPE  Energy [R]evolution scenarios have become a well-known  and respected energy analysis since first published in 2005.  In the third version of the Energy [R]evolution published in  june 2010 in berlin, we reached out to the scientific  community to a much larger extent. The IPCC´s Special  Report Renewables (SRREN) chose the Energy Revolution as  one of the four benchmark scenarios for climate mitigation  energy pathways, because it was the most ambitious  scenario: combining an uptake of renewable energy and  energy efficiency, it put forwards the highest renewable  energy share by 2050. following the publication of the  SRREN in May 2011 in Abu Dhabi, the ER became a widely  quoted energy scenario and is now part of many scientific  debates and referenced in numerous scientific peer-reviewed  publications.  In March 2015, the Energy [R]evolution received worldwide  recognition when a widely circulated report from the uS-based  Meister Consultants Group concluded that the rapid  market growth of renewable power generation has been  largely underestimated and reported that “just about no one  saw it coming. The world’s biggest energy agencies, financial  institutions, and fossil fuel companies, for the most part,  seriously underestimated just how fast the clean power  sector could and would grow”. Meister identifies one group  that got the market scenario closest to right, however, and it  wasn’t the International Energy Agency or Goldman Sachs or  the uS Department of Energy (DOE) – it was Greenpeace with  the Energy [R]evolution project.  The basic principles and strategic approach of the  development of the Energy [R]evolution concepts have not  significantly changed since the beginning. They still serve as  a basis for scenario modeling. However, the methodology  and underlying scientific research about transport  technologies and concepts, energy resource assessments,  infrastructural requirements, technology developments, and  the cost of renewables have been continuously updated and  improved. The renewable energy targets have been increased  from 50% to 80% and finally to 100% by 2050.  Since the first Energy [R]evolution was published a decade  ago, the energy sector has changed significantly. Renewable  energy technologies have become mainstream in most  countries as a consequence of dramatically reduced costs. A  future renewable energy supply is no longer science fiction,  but work in progress.  However, the growth rates of renewables – especially in the  heating sector and in transport – are far too slow to achieve the  energy-related CO2 reductions required to avoid dangerous  climate change. A fundamental shift in the way we consume  and generate energy must begin immediately and be well  10  e x e c u t i v e s u M M a r y  image adele island, off of australia’s north coast. Made uP of a series of beach ridges built by sands washed uP froM the surrounding sandbanks during storMs. the highest Point  is little More than 4 Meters (13 feet) above sea level on this grassy but treeless island. a solar-Powered lighthouse aPPears as a tiny white dot at the north tiP of the island. adele  island has been classified as an iMPortant bird area because it is a breeding site of world iMPortance for lesser frigatebirds and three other sPecies.    the on-going energy revolution is still far too slow  The International Energy Agency published an evaluation of the  current development of the energy sector in May 2015 (IEA –  TCEP 2015),2 which concluded that the implementation of  renewables and energy efficiency is successful but too slow to  meet the 2°C target. Here are some of the IEA’s conclusions:  costs: Increasingly, renewables are competitive with new  fossil fuel plants, and the cost gap between renewable  electricity and fossil power from new plants is closing  worldwide. Nonetheless, markets still do not reflect the true  environmental cost of power generation from fossil fuels.  policy: Power markets must be redesigned to accommodate  variable, distributed renewables. Obstacles still exist for the  financing of renewable energy projects and grid connections,  thereby slowing down the transition. but the worst policy  mistakes are uncertainty and retroactive changes.  technology: Cogeneration and renewable heat have both  grown in absolute terms but are not increasing quickly  enough as a share of energy supply. The share of  cogeneration in power supply has even stagnated. Likewise,  battery storage has mainly been developed for mobility up to  now but is increasingly used for frequency regulation to  integrate a greater share of variable renewables.  mobility: Electric vehicles are catching on, with an increasing  number of manufacturers now offering hybrid and electric  options. fuel efficiency standards have also made light  vehicles more efficient. The standard should now be applied  to larger trucks and buses.  buildings: The technologies are available, and targets are in  place in many regions. However, the rate and depth of  energy-efficient renovations needs to increase for true  progress to be made in this sector because the building stock  has a service life counted in decades.  The Renewable Policy Network for the 21st Century (REN21)  has undertaken a global renewable market analysis each year  in june since 2004. The publication – “Renewables – Global  Status Report” – is among the most comprehensive global and  national surveys of the renewable industry sector. According to  the latest edition, the global renewable energy market in 2014  was dominated by three power generation technologies: solar  photovoltaics (Pv), wind, and hydro. Combined, these  technologies added 127 GW of new power generation capacity  worldwide. by year’s end, renewables made up an estimated  60% of net additions to the global power capacity. In several  countries renewables represented a higher share of added  capacity (REN21-2015).3 The increase in market volume and  strong global competition led to significant cost reductions,  especially for solar Pv and wind power. As a result, other  renewable energy technologies were under pressure to lower  costs, particularly in the heating sector due to the increased  competitiveness of electricity-based heating systems. Cost-competitive  solar Pv in combination with electrical heat pumps  have become economically viable, negatively impacting the  solar thermal collector market.  underway before 2020 in order to avert the worst impacts of  climate change.1 We need to limit global warming to less than  2° Celsius, above which the impacts become devastating.  climate change is not a prediction anymore –  it is reality  The world’s energy supply has bestowed great benefits on  society, but it has also come with high price tag. The world’s  most rigorous scientific bodies are in agreement on climate  change, which is occurring due to a build-up of greenhouse  gases, especially carbon dioxide, in the atmosphere caused  by human activity.  Globally, most fossil fuel is used to generate energy, either  electricity, heat, or motor fuel. We have evidence that, if  unchanged, the growth of fossil energy will lead to  unmanageable impacts on the global population.  Climate change threatens all continents, living systems,  coastal cities, food systems and natural systems. It will mean  more natural disasters like fire and floods, disruption to food  growing patterns and damage to property as sea levels rise.  If we remain dependent on fossil fuel in the pursuit of energy  security, the result will be a potentially catastrophic spiral  towards increasing greenhouse gas emissions and more  extreme climate impacts. The need for more fuels is driving  the industry towards unconventional sources, like shale oil  and gas, and gigantic coal mines, which destroy ecosystems  and put water supply in danger. Relying on a fuel that has a  fluctuating cost on the global market is also harmful to  economies. The use of nuclear energy is sometimes touted  as a climate change solution, but it is simply not viable. Apart  from being too dangerous and too slow to develop, it is also  incredibly expensive if all economic costs over plant lifetime  are taken into account.  furthermore, by switching to unconventional sources, we  extract more carbon from the ground. yet, since the  International Energy Agency coined the term “un-burnable  carbon,” the consensus is that we must leave most (around  two thirds) of our current carbon resources in the ground if  the world is to stay within its carbon budget. The more  unconventional fuels we add to our resources, the less likely  staying within an increase of two degrees Celsius becomes.  According to the IPCC identified the remaining carbon  budget: humankind cannot emit more than 1,000 gigatonnes  of CO2 from now. Therefore it is essential to move rapidly  towards a decarbonized energy system – in ideal case one  that delivers 100% renewable energy by 2050.    While developments in the renewable energy, heating and  cooling sector were slower than in the power sector, the  markets for solar thermal collectors and geothermal heat  pumps grew by 9%. bio-heat production remained stable in  2014, increasing only 1% from 2013 levels. The lack of  infrastructure for heating systems and an uncertain policy  environment impeded the development of the renewable  energy renewable energy heating market (REN21-2015).  The number of electric vehicles worldwide doubled year over  year to 665,000. E-mobility and recent developments in  battery storage (including significant cost reductions) are  likely to change the future role of renewable energy in the  transport sector. biofuels, however, are still the main  renewable fuel source in the transport sector; they grew by  8.4% in 2014 compared the previous year (REN21-2015).  In conclusion, developments in the heating/cooling sector  and the transport sector in particular are far too slow. Despite  all the success in the renewable power sector, the extreme  growth of coal power generation, especially in China,  undercuts many successes with renewables. However, the  first sign of a stagnation of coal demand in China – even a  small decline for the first time in 2014 – provides reason to  hope. The political framework of energy markets must adapt  to the newly emerging, mostly distributed energy  technologies in order to support the transition to 100%  renewable energy supply.  Thus, Energy [R]evolution has begun, especially in the power  sector, but heating and transport significantly lag behind.  Overall, the transition from fossil and nuclear fuels to  renewables is too slow, and energy demand is still growing  too quickly.  less is more  using energy efficiently is cheaper than producing new  energy from scratch and often has many other benefits. An  efficient clothes washing machine or dishwasher, for  example, uses less power and saves water, too. Efficiency in  buildings doesn’t mean going without – it should provide a  higher level of comfort. for example, a well-insulated house  will feel warmer in the winter, cooler in the summer and be  healthier to live in. An efficient refrigerator is quieter, has no  frost inside or condensation outside, and will probably last  longer. Efficient lighting offers more light where you need it.  Efficiency is thus really better described as ‘more with less’.  the transport revolution must start in megacities  Sustainable transport is needed just as much as a shift to  renewable electricity and heat production in order to reduce  the level of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere. Today, just  over one fourth (27%) (IEA WEO SR 2015) of current energy  use comes from the transport sector, including road and rail,  aviation and sea transport. by the end of 2013, 92.7% of all  transport energy need came from oil products, 2.5% from  biofuels and only 1% from electricity (IEA WEO SR 2015). A  transition from fossil fuels to renewable electricity – either  directly or via synthetic fuels – for the entire global transport  sector is required in order to phase-out carbon emissions.  This is one of the most difficult parts of the Energy  [R]evolution and requires a true technical revolution. It is  ambitious but nevertheless possible with currently available  technologies for land-based and other transport.  14% of all fossil transport fuels are used for “bunker fuel,”  meaning transport energy for international shipping and  international air transport. In order to replace bunker fuels  entirely with renewables, a combination of energy efficiency  and renewable fuels is required. both the marine and aviation  sector can start this transition, but we need more research  and development along the way towards a truly 100%  renewable system. biofuels and synfuels – produced with  renewable electricity – are the only realistic renewable energy  option for planes currently and for the next decade. for  ships, new wind-based drives, such as new generation sails  and flettner rotors, are needed to replace some engine fuels.  The transport [R]evolution, however, must start in  (mega)cities, where a modular shift from individual to efficient  and convenient public transport systems powered by  renewable electricity is possible in a short time frame and  with currently available technologies. Political action is the  main barrier in changing land-based transport systems.  the global energy [r]evolution – key results  Renewable energy sources accounted for 12% the world´s  primary energy demand in 2012. The main sources of today  are biomass and hydro, which are mostly used for heating  and transport but increasingly in the power sector as well.  for electricity generation, renewables contribute about 21%,  just as for heat supply (21%). While solar photovoltaic and  wind revolutionize the power sector with increasing shares,  hydropower remains the largest renewable source. biomass  is the number one source for renewable heating. However,  geothermal heat pumps and solar thermal collectors  increasingly contribute as well. About 81.2% of the primary  energy supply today still comes from fossil fuels energy.  The two Energy [R]evolution scenarios describe development  pathways to a sustainable energy supply, achieving the  urgently needed CO2 reduction target and a nuclear phaseout,  without unconventional oil resources. The key results of  the global Energy [R]evolution scenarios are the following:  • use energy wisely: Combining the projections on population  development, GDP growth and energy intensity results in  future development pathways for the world’s final energy  demand. under the Reference scenario, total final energy  demand increases by 65% from the current 326,900 Pj/a  to 539,000 Pj/a in 2050. In the basic Energy [R]evolution  scenario, final energy demand decreases by 12%  compared to current consumption and is expected to reach  289,000 Pj/a by 2050. The Advanced scenario will shift the  energy demand trends; the peak will be reached in 2020  with a total consumption of 355,000 Pj/a – 7% below the  Reference case - and remain at that level for about a  decade. Due to a faster electrification of the transport  sector including higher shares of public transport the  overall final energy demand drops below current levels  before 2040 and reaches 279,000 Pj/a by 2050 – 15%  below the current global demand.  • electricity replaces fuels: under both Energy [R]evolution  scenarios, due to economic growth, increasing living  standards and electrification of the transport sector, overall  electricity demand is expected to increase despite  efficiency gains in all sectors. Total electricity demand will  rise from about 18,860 TWh/a in 2012 to 37,000 TWh/a by  2050 in the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario. Compared  to the Reference scenario, efficiency measures in the  industry, residential and service sectors avoid the  generation of about 16,700 TWh/a. This reduction can be  achieved in particular by introducing highly efficient  electronic devices using the best available technology in all  demand sectors.  The transformation to a carbon free 100% renewable  energy system in the Advanced Energy [R]evolution  scenario will further increase the electricity demand in 2050  up to more than 40,000 TWh/a. Electricity will become the  major renewable ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for  various purposes but also for the generation of synthetic  fuels for fossil fuels substitution. Around 8,100 TWh are  used in 2050 for electric vehicles and rail transport, around  5,100 TWh for hydrogen and 3,600 TWh for synthetic liquid  fuel generation for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  • reducing global heat demand: Efficiency gains in the  heating sector are even larger than in the electricity sector.  under both Energy [R]evolution scenarios, consumption  equivalent to about 76,000 Pj/a is avoided through  efficiency gains by 2050 compared to the Reference  scenario. As a result of energy-related renovation of the  existing stock of residential buildings, the introduction of  low energy standards and ‘passive climatisation’ for new  buildings, as well as highly efficient air conditioning  systems, enjoyment of even greater comfort and better  energy services will be accompanied with much lower  future energy demand.  • electricity generation: The development of the electricity  supply sector is characterised by a dynamically growing  renewable energy market and an increasing share of  renewable electricity. This trend will more than compensate  for the phasing out of nuclear power production in the  Energy [R]evolution scenarios, continuously reducing the  number of fossil fuel-fired power plants as well. by 2050,  92% of the electricity produced worldwide will come from  renewable energy sources in the basic Energy [R]evolution  scenario. ‘New’ renewables – mainly wind, Pv, CSP and  geothermal energy – will contribute 68% to the total  electricity generation. Already by 2020, the share of  renewable electricity production will be 31% and 58% by  2030. The installed capacity of renewables will reach about  7,800 GW in 2030 and 17,000 GW by 2050.  A 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources  in the Advanced scenario leads to around 23,600 GW  installed generation capacity in 2050. by 2020, wind and Pv  will become the main contributors to the growing market  share. After 2020, the continuing growth of wind and Pv will  be complemented by electricity from solar thermal,  geothermal and ocean energy. The Energy [R]evolution  scenarios will lead to a high share of flexible power  generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of already 31% to  36% by 2030 and 53% to 55% by 2050. Therefore, smart  grids, demand side management (DSM), energy storage  capacities and other options need to be expanded in order  to increase the flexibility of the power system for grid  integration, load balancing and a secure supply of electricity.  • future costs of electricity generation: The introduction of  renewable technologies under both Energy [R]evolution  scenarios slightly increases the future costs of electricity  generation compared to the Reference scenario by 2030.  However, this difference in full cost of generation will be  minor with around 0.2 uS$ cent/kWh in both the basic E[R]  and the 100% renewables Advanced scenario, however,  without taking into account potential integration costs for  storage or other load-balancing measures. Due to  increasing prices for conventional fuels, electricity  generation costs will become economically favourable  across all world regions starting in 2030 under the Energy  [R]evolution scenarios. In some countries such as China  and India, the Energy [R]evolution pathway – under the  assumption of global fuel price paths – is economical from  the very beginning and cheaper than conventional power  supply after 2020 already. by 2050, the average global  generation costs in the basic Energy [R]evolution will be 2.5  uS$ cent/kWh below the Reference case, while the  Advanced scenario achieves lower cost savings due to  higher capacity needs (1.7 uS$ cents/kWh below the  Reference case).  • the future electricity bill: under the Reference scenario, on  the other hand, growth in demand and increasing fossil fuel  prices result in total electricity supply costs rising from  today’s uS$ 2.06 trillion per year to more than uS$ 5.35  trillion in 2050, compared to 19% lower costs (uS$ 4.3  trillion) in the basic E[R] scenario due to increasing energy  efficiency and shifting energy supply to renewables.  The Advanced scenario with 100% renewable power  replaces more fossil fuels with electricity and therefore  leads to higher overall generation costs of uS$ 6.2 trillion  by 2050 but savings in fuel supply costs especially for the  transport and industry sector due to a fossil fuel phase-out.  both Energy [R]evolution scenarios not only comply with    world´s CO2 reduction targets, but also help stabilise energy  costs and relieve the economic pressure on society.  • world: future investments in the power sector: Around uS$  48 trillion is required in investment for the Energy  [R]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of  the plants) - approximately uS$ 1.23 trillion per year, about  50% more than in the Reference case (uS$ 24.5 trillion or  0.63 trillion per year). Investments for the Advanced  scenario add up to uS$ 64.6 trillion by 2050, on average  uS$ 1.66 trillion per year, including high investments in  additional power plants for the production of synthetic  fuels. under the Reference scenario, the level of investment  in conventional power plants adds up to almost 50%, while  the other half would be invested in renewable energy and  cogeneration by 2050.  under both Energy [R]evolution scenarios, however, around  95% of the entire investment in the power sector would  shift towards renewables and cogeneration. by 2030, the  fossil fuel share of power sector investment would be  focused mainly on gas power plants.  because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario reach a  total of uS$ 39 trillion by 2050, approximately uS$ 1 trillion  per year. The total fuel cost savings would therefore cover  170% of the total additional investments compared to the  Reference scenario. fuel cost savings in the Advanced  scenario are even higher and add up to uS$ 42 trillion, or  uS$ 1.1 trillion per year. Thus additional investment under  the Advanced scenario would be covered entirely (107%)  by fuel cost savings. Renewable energy sources would then  go on to produce electricity without any further fuel costs  beyond 2050, while costs for coal and gas would continue  to be a burden on national economies.  • world: energy supply for heating: Today, renewables meet  around 21% of the global energy demand for heating, the  main contribution coming from the use of biomass.  Dedicated support instruments are required to ensure a  dynamic development in particular for renewable  technologies for buildings and renewable process heat  production. In Energy [R]evolution scenarios, renewables  provide 42% (basic) and 43% (advanced) of global heat  demand in 2030 and 86% / 94% in 2050 respectively.  ◦ Energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating by 33 % in 2050  (relative to the Reference scenario), in spite of improving  living standards and economic growth.  ◦ In the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal  energy (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and  hydrogen from renewable sources are increasingly  substituting for fossil fuel-fired systems.  ◦ A shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  CO2 emissions.  up to 2030, biomass remains the main contributor of the  growing market share. After 2030, the continuing growth of  solar collectors and a growing share of geothermal and  environmental heat as well as heat from renewable  hydrogen will further reduce the dependence on fossil fuels.  The Advanced scenario results in a complete substitution of  the remaining gas consumption by hydrogen generated  from renewable electricity.  • world: future investments in the heating sector: In the  heating sector, the Energy [R]evolution scenarios also  require a major revision of current investment strategies in  heating technologies. In particular, far more solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need to be  installed if these potentials are to be tapped for the heating  sector. The use of biomass for heating purposes - often  traditional biomass today - will be substantially reduced in  the Energy [R]evolution scenarios and replaced by more  efficient and sustainable renewable heating technologies.  Renewable heating technologies are extremely variable,  from low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors  to very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar  arrays. Thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the  Energy [R]evolution scenario in total requires around uS$  16.3 trillion to be invested in renewable heating  technologies up to 2050 (including investments for  replacement after the economic lifetime of the plants) -  approximately uS$ 420 billion per year. The Advanced  scenario assumes an even more ambitious expansion of  renewable technologies resulting in an average investment  of around uS$ 429 billion per year, while the main strategy  in the scenario is the substitution of the remaining natural  gas amounts with hydrogen or other synthetic fuels.  • world: future employment in the energy sector – reference  versus advanced scenario: The Advanced Energy  [R]evolution scenario results in more energy sector jobs  globally at every stage of the projection.  ◦ There are 35.5 million energy sector jobs in the  Advanced Energy [R]evolution in 2020, and 29.6 million  in the Reference scenario.  ◦ In 2025, there are 45.2 million jobs in the Advanced  Energy [R]evolution scenario, and 29.1 million in the  Reference scenario.  ◦ In 2030, there are 46.1 million jobs in the Advanced  Energy [R]evolution scenario and 27.3 million in the  Reference scenario.  jobs in the coal sector decline in both the Reference scenario  and the Advanced scenario, as a result of productivity  improvements in the industry, coupled with a move away from  coal in the Advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario.    In the Reference scenario jobs increase slightly to 2020,  after which energy sector jobs decline. This is mainly driven  by losses in the coal sector. At 2030, jobs are 4% (2.3  million) below 2015 levels. In the Energy [R]evolution  scenario, strong growth in the renewable sector leads to an  increase of 25% in total energy sector jobs by 2020, and  job numbers are nearly 60% above 2015 levels in 2025.  job numbers continue to rise after 2025, to reach  46.1 million jobs by 2030.  Renewable energy accounts for 86% of energy jobs by  2030. Solar photovoltaics will provide 9.7 million jobs,  equal to the amount of coal jobs today. Employment in the  wind sector will increase by a factor of 10 from 0.7 million  today to over 7.8 million in 2030, twice as many jobs as the  current oil and gas industry.  • world: transport: A key target is to introduce incentives for  people to drive smaller cars and use new, more efficient  vehicle concepts. In addition, it is vital to shift transport use  to efficient modes like rail, light rail and buses, especially in  the expanding large metropolitan areas. Along with rising  prices for fossil fuels, these changes reduce the further  growth in car sales projected under the Reference scenario.  Due to population increase, GDP growth and higher living  standards, energy demand from the transport sector is  expected to increase in the Reference scenario by around  65% from 90,000 Pj/a in 2012 to 148,000 Pj/a in 2050. In  the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario, efficiency measures  and modal shifts will save 53% (78,700 Pj/a) in 2050  compared to the Reference scenario.  Additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to  even higher energy savings in the Advanced scenario of  62% (92,000 Pj/a) in 2050 compared to the Reference  scenario. Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid,  plug-in hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring  about large efficiency gains. by 2030, electricity will provide  9% of the transport sector’s total energy demand in the  Energy [R]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 39% in  the basic and 52% in the Advanced scenario. Hydrogen  and other synthetic fuels generated using renewable  electricity are complementary options to further increase  the renewable share in the transport sector. In 2050, up to  14,000 Pj/a of hydrogen is used in the transport sector for  the Advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario.  • world: development of CO2 emissions: While the world’s  emissions of CO2 will increase by 56% between 2012 and  2050 under the Reference scenario, under the basic Energy  [R]evolution scenario they will decrease from 30,470 million  tonnes in 2012 to 4,360 million tonnes in 2050. Annual per  capita emissions will drop from 4.3 tonne to 0.5 tonne. In  spite of the abstinence of nuclear power production and  increasing power demand, CO2 emissions will decrease in  the electricity sector. In the long run, efficiency gains and  the increased use of renewable electricity in vehicles  strongly reduce emissions in the transport sector as well.  With a 31% share of CO2, the industry sector will be the  largest source of emissions in 2050 in the basic E[R]  scenario. by 2050, global CO2 emissions are around 80%  below 1990 levels in the basic Energy [R]evolution  scenario.  co2 emission peak by 2020: The 100% renewable energy  Advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario will decarbonize the  entire energy system by 2050. under that pathway the  combination of energy efficiency and renewable energy  technologies will lead to a stabilization of global CO2  emissions by 2020 and a constant reduction towards near  zero emissions in 2050.  by 2030, global CO2 emissions would be back to 1990  levels. Only a decade later, a further 60% reduction is  achieved. The total carbon emission between 2012 and  2050 would add up to 667 Gt CO2 in the Advanced Energy  [R]evolution scenario and 744 Gt CO2 in the basic E[R]. In  comparison, the Reference would lead to 1,400 Gt CO2  between 2012 and 2050 – more than twice as much as  under the Advanced scenario bringing the world to a +4°C  pathway with disastrous consequences for the global flora  and fauna and life-threatening impacts for the humanity.  Switching to 100% renewable is therefore a matter of  survival.  • world: primary energy consumption: under the basic E[R]  scenario, primary energy demand will decrease by 19%  from today’s 534,870 Pj/a to around 433,000 Pj/a.  Compared to the Reference scenario, overall primary  energy demand will be reduced by 50% in 2050 under the  E[R] scenario (REf: around 860,000 Pj in 2050). The  Advanced scenario results in a slightly primary energy  consumption of around 450,000 Pj in 2050 due to  additional conversion losses for the production of  synthetic-fuels.  The Energy [R]evolution scenario aims to phase out coal  and oil as fast as technically and economically possible by  expanding renewable energy and quickly rolling out very  efficient vehicle concepts in the transport sector to replace  oil-powered combustion engines. This leads to an overall  renewable final energy share of 42% in 2030 and 72% in  2040 in the Advanced E[R]. by 2050, 100% of all global  energy demand is covered with renewables. The only  remaining fossil fuels are assumed for non-energy uses,  such as petrochemical and steel products.  further research is needed  further research and development of innovative technologies  is a precondition of the Energy [R]evolution and the required  fundamental transformation of the energy systems. Thus, the  scenarios assume further improvements of performance and  costs of plants for electricity and heat generation from  renewables, new vehicle concepts and in an implicit way also  for other infrastructures such as electricity and heating grids,  charging infrastructure, synthetic fuel generation plants or    a sustainable world energy outlook  storages and other load balancing options. The spatial  resolution of the scenarios and their development pathways  is very coarse distinguishing ten different world regions.  Energy systems and aspects such as the refinancing of  investment in new capacities are largely determined by  specific local and regional conditions. Therefore, the Energy  [R]evolution needs more in-depth systems analysis and  assessment of alternative pathways and concepts under  different framework conditions such as potentials and cost-effectiveness  of renewable energy use. Infrastructural needs,  economic and societal aspects need to be considered at  least country-wise and by more sophisticated methods as it  was possible for this study. Such analyses are already done  or underway in several countries and regions. Other countries  and regions still need more scientific analysis of feasible ways  deploying their potentials for efficiency measures and  renewable energies and for implementing new technologies in  a cost-effective way. To fully understand the Energy  [R]evolution requires the use and further development of  existing sophisticated modelling approaches such as system  dynamics, agent-based modelling of actor’s behaviour or  dynamic modelling of capacity expansion and operation with  high spatial and temporal resolution.  policies required for a transition to 100% energy  [r]evolution:  To make the Energy [R]evolution a reality, immediate political  action is required. There are no economic or technical  barriers to move to 100% renewable energy in the long-term.  Governments regulate energy markets, both for supply and  demand; they can educate everyone from consumers to  industrialists and stimulate the markets for renewable energy  and energy efficiency by implementing a wide range of  economic mechanisms. They can also build on the successful  policies already adopted by other countries. To get started,  governments need to agree on further binding emission  reduction commitments under the uNfCCC process.  Meanwhile, the global emissions landscape is changing  rapidly. As a result of declining coal consumption in China,  global energy-related CO2 emissions remained stable in 2014  for the first time in 40 years, despite continued economic  growth. If global mitigation endeavours are strengthened, this  trend will continue. This new landscape provides a greater  chance that the coal, oil and nuclear industries – which  continue to fight to maintain their dominance by propagating  the outdated notion that citizens need their unsustainable  energy – will face dramatic changes in both energy markets  and support from governments.  an effective climate agreement should include strong short-term  action and set out a clear long-term pathway. key  elements include the following:  a strong long-term goal: phase-out of fossil fuels and nuclear  power by 2050 through a just transition towards 100% renewable  energy, as well as the protection and restoration of forests. A  clear signal to decision-makers and investors at all levels that  the world is moving towards phasing out carbon emissions  entirely and accelerating the transition to 100% renewable  energy is needed. Countries’ short-term emission reduction  commitments must align with this long-term goal and support  transformational change, ensuring both fairness and  solidarity.  a 5-year cycle process for country commitments starting in  2020. All countries’ commitments should follow a 5-year  commitment period starting in 2020, which would form the  first period of the Paris Protocol. Moving forward, each period  would further deepen the commitments, allowing no backsliding.  5-year commitment periods incentivize early action,  allow for dynamic political responses and prevent the lock-in  of low ambition. They allow for a timely adaptation to the  technological advances of renewable energies and energy  efficiency.  legally binding: A legally binding protocol - including common  accounting rules for mitigation and finance - will compel  leaders to act boldly; legally binding obligations are a real  expression of political will, ensuring durability in the face of  political changes and increased ambition over time.  shifting subsidies away from fossil fuels: All countries should  commit to phase-out all subsidies - both for production and  consumption - for fossil fuels by 2020.  strong commitment for adaptation, finance and loss and  damage: The Paris Protocol should acknowledge that less  mitigation action means a greater need for adaptation,  especially finance. Consequently, an adaptation goal should  be established to ensure that the level of support meets  vulnerable countries’ needs under the actual warming  anticipated. A roadmap must be adopted in Paris to meet the  uS$ 100 billion commitment for climate financing by 2020.  bring down emissions before 2020. The gap between the  agreed upon goal of keeping warming below 2°C/1.5°C and  what countries actually intend to do by 2020 is widely  acknowledged. The pledges at the time of this writing (mid-  2015) would lead us into a world of 3 or more degrees  warming, with all its devastating consequences for humans  and ecosystems. While a process on how to bring the  emissions down was established at COP17 in 2011,  countries are still – four years later – failing to agree upon  sufficient action to mitigate greenhouse gases. In Paris at the  latest, governments and corporate leaders need to provide  innovate solutions for breaking the stalemate and laying the  groundwork for bold actions before 2020.  Climate Change and Nuclear Threat  image the region of bohai sea, yellow sea, and east china is one of the Most turbid and dynaMic ocean areas in the world. the brown area along china’s subei shoal is turbid water  coMMonly seen in coastal regions. shallow water dePths, tidal currents, and strong winter winds likely contributed to the Mixing of sediMent through the water.  the impacts  of climate change  climate change  – the science  nuclear threats  no solution  to cliMate Protection  the dangers  of nuclear Power  bridging  the carbon  gap”  “    The world’s power supply has bestowed great benefits on  society, but it has also come with high price tag. The world’s  most rigorous scientific bodies are in agreement on climate  change, which is occurring due to a build of greenhouse  gases, especially carbon dioxide, in the atmosphere caused  by human activity.  Globally, most fossil fuel is used to generate energy, either  electricity, heat, or motor fuel. We have evidence that, if  unchanged, the growth of fossil energy will lead to  unmanageable impacts on the global population.  Climate change threatens all continents, living systems,  coastal cities, food systems and natural systems. It will mean  more natural disasters like fire and flood, disruption to food  growing patterns and damage to property as sea levels rise.  If we remain dependent on fossil fuel in the pursuit of energy  security, the result will be a potentially catastrophic spiral  towards increasing greenhouse gas emissions and more  extreme climate impacts. The need for more fuels is driving the  industry towards unconventional sources, like shale oil and gas,  and gigantic coal mines, which destroy ecosystems and put  water supply in danger. Relying on a fuel that has a fluctuating  cost on the global market is also harmful to economies.  furthermore, by switching to unconventional sources, we  extract more carbon from the ground. yet, since the  International Energy Agency coined the term “un-burnable  carbon,” the consensus is that we must leave most (around  two thirds) of our current carbon resources in the ground if  the world is to stay within its carbon budget. The more  unconventional fuels we add to our resources, the less likely  staying within an increase of two degrees Celsius becomes.  The use of nuclear energy as a climate change solution is  sometimes touted as a solution, but it is simply not viable.  Apart from being too dangerous and too slow to develop, it is  also incredibly expensive.  1.1 the impacts of climate change  Every day, we damage our climate by using fossil fuels (oil,  coal and gas) for energy and transport. The resulting changes  are likely to destroy the livelihoods of millions of people,  especially in the developing world, as well as ecosystems and  species, over the coming decades. Significantly reducing our  greenhouse gas emissions makes both environmental and  economic sense.  box 1.1 | what is the greenhouse effect?  The greenhouse effect is a natural process, in which the  atmosphere traps some of the sun’s energy, warming the  earth and moderating our climate. Increase in ‘greenhouse  gases’ from human activity has enhanced this effect,  artificially raising global temperatures and disrupting our  climate. The main greenhouse gas is carbon dioxide -  produced by burning fossil fuels and through deforestation.  Others include methane from agriculture, animals and landfill  sites; nitrous oxide from agricultural production; and a variety  of industrial chemicals.  According to the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change,  the united Nations forum for established scientific opinion, the  world’s temperature is expected to increase over the next  hundred years by up to 4.8° Celsius if no action is taken to  reduce greenhouse gas emissions – much faster than anything  experienced so far in human history. At more than a 2°C rise,  damage to ecosystems and disruption of the climate system  increase dramatically. An average global warming of more  than 2°C threatens millions of people with an increased risk of  hunger, disease, flooding and water shortages.  A certain amount of climate change is now “locked in”, based  on the amount of carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases  already emitted into the atmosphere since industrialisation.  No one knows exactly how much warming is “safe” for life on  the plant. However, we know is that the effects of climate  change are already impacting populations and ecosystems.  We can already see melting glaciers, disintegrating polar ice,  thawing permafrost, dying coral reefs, rising sea levels,  changing ecosystems, record droughts, and fatal heat waves  made more severe by a changed climate.  1.2 climate change – the science  En November 2014, the 5th Assessment Report of the  International Panel on climate change (IPCC) was published.  Over 5 years, several hundered climate scientists analysed the  latest scientific literature to pull together a comprehensive  overview about the latest finds of climate research. This  subchapter summarizes the key findings based on the Summary  for Policy Makers (SPM).    1.2.1 observed changes  first, the IPCC sees a clear human component in climate  change, with anthropogenic greenhouse gas emissions  having reached an unprecedented level. The result will be  considerable detrimental impacts on “human and natural  systems” (IPCC-AR 5 SPM).1  There is no question that global warming is happening;  indeed, “since the 1950s, many of the observed changes are  unprecedented over decades to millennia. The atmosphere  and ocean have warmed, the amounts of snow and ice have  diminished, and sea level has risen.” (IPCC-AR 5 SPM). The  global average temperature per decade at the earth’s surface  continues to increase, with 1983 to 2012 likely being “the  warmest 30-year period of the last 1400 years in the Northern  Hemisphere.” from 1880 to 2012, the planet has warmed up  by 0.85 degrees Celsius. (IPCC-AR5-SPM)  Global warming affects the planetary water cycle. Areas with  little precipitation have waters of higher salinity because more  water is lost through evaporation than precipitation. Globally,  these areas are indeed becoming more saline, whereas  waters have become fresher in areas of greater precipitation  since the 1950s – a clear sign that dry areas are becoming  drier while wet areas are getting wetter.  Likewise, the oceans have absorbed more CO2 since the  beginning of industrialization. As a result, ocean surface  water has become 26 percent more acidic, with the pH  having decreased by 0.1 (IPCC-AR5-SPM).  figure 1.1 | globaly averaged combined land  and ocean surface temperature anomaly    from 1992 to 2011, the world’s largest ice sheets – in  Greenland and the Antarctic – also shrank dramatically, and  glaciers are melting almost everywhere. Scientists are also  highly confident that temperatures in most permafrost regions  have increased since the early 1980s, partly due to changing  snow cover (IPCC-AR5-SPM). Likewise, Arctic sea ice shrank  by 3.5 to 4.1 percent per decade from 1979 to 2012. In  contrast, the extent of Antarctic sea ice increased by 1.2 to  1.8 percent per decade from 1979 to 2012 as more ice  slipped from the continent into the water (IPCC-AR5-SPM).  As more ice melts, sea level rises. According to the IPCC,  “Over the period 1901 to 2010, global mean sea level rose by  0.19 m on average,” faster than at any time in the past 2000  years (IPCC-AR5-SPM).  1.2.2 causes of climate change  The atmosphere lets light pass through to the surface, where  objects absorb this energy, giving off heat radiation in the  process. The atmosphere then partially traps this heat. Since  the beginning of industrialization, anthropogenic greenhouse  gases (GHGs) have significantly increased concentrations of  carbon dioxide ( CO2), methane (CH4) and nitrous oxide (N2O),  to name the three most potent GHGs (IPCC-AR5-SPM). As a  result, Earth’s atmosphere is more effective at trapping heat.  Population growth is a major factor in carbon emissions from  fossil fuel consumption, but the impact of this growth  remained stable from 2000 to 2010 relative to the three  previous decades. In contrast, the impact of economic  growth has skyrocketed. In particular, greater coal  consumption has begun to make the global carbon intensity  of energy consumption higher once again after a brief period  of progress (IPCC-AR5-SPM).  Since the IPCC’s fourth Assessment Report, scientists have  collected even more evidence of man-made climate change.  In fact, scientists now estimate that anthropomorphic  impacts make up “more than half of the observed increase in  global average surface temperature from 1951 to 2010”  (IPCC-AR5-SPM). All continents except Antarctica are  affected. Since 1960, anthropomorphic effects are likely to  have affected the global water cycle, including the melting of  glaciers and, since 1993, surface melting of the Greenland  ice sheet. Likewise, civilization’s emissions are very likely  contributors to Arctic sea ice loss since 1979 and the global  mean sea level rise observed since the 1970s.  1.2.3 impacts of climate change  Natural and human systems are sensitive to climate change,  and impacts have been observed on all continents and in  oceans (IPCC-AR5-SPM). Along with melting snow and ice,  changes in precipitation are affecting both the quantity and  quality of water resources. On land and in both fresh and  saltwater, numerous species – plant and animal – have seen  the location of their habitats shift, as have migration patterns.  Seasonal activities are also changing, and species are  interacting differently in response to climate change. Ocean  acidification also affects marine life.  you don’t need to be a scientist to measure the changes.  Humans are also witnessing the effects directly, with  numerous studies showing that a wide range of crops in a  large number of regions now produce smaller harvests (IPCCAR5-  SPM). The Inuit can feel the permafrost soften under  their feet, leading built structures to collapse. Pacific  Islanders have seen their freshwater supplies contaminated  with saltwater and coastlines inundated as sea level rises.  Numerous countries around the world increasingly experience  extreme floods and droughts. The IPCC itself admits that “not  all regional effects of climate change are known,” but all of  these trends were predicted. If current predictions for the  future hold true, as is likely, the future looks bleak.  Sea level will continue to rise as glaciers melt, bringing  landlocked ice into the oceans. In addition, the oceans  themselves will thermally expand as the global temperature rises.  There will also be positive feedback – changes that amplify  the trend. for instance, melting permafrost will release  massive amounts of greenhouse gases. Less snow and ice  cover will mean that more heat is absorbed by darker  surfaces. furthermore, numerous natural systems – coral  reefs, mangroves, Arctic and Alpine ecosystems, boreal and  tropical forests, prairie wetlands, and grasslands – will  struggle to survive as the climate changes; if these natural  systems shrink, they will not be able to trap as much carbon  dioxide. Another result will be a greater risk of species  extinction and lower biodiversity.  In Europe, rivers will increasingly flood, and the risk of floods,  erosion, and wetland loss will increase in coastal areas  everywhere. Industrialized countries have emitted the most  GHGs, but developing countries – the ones least able to  adapt to climate change – will be impacted the most. The  areas hit the hardest include large parts of Africa, Asia, and  the Pacific rim.  The long-term effects of global warming will be catastrophic.  The Greenland ice sheet could melt completely, thereby  eventually raising sea level up to seven meters. There is also  new evidence that Antarctic ice is now at the risk of melting  based on increased rates of ice discharge. As this freshwater  enters the ocean, the Gulf Stream in the Atlantic could slow  down or stop completely. The result would be a much  different climate for Europe, which depends on the Gulf  Stream to bring up warm air from the South. furthermore, the  Golf Stream is part of a global system of ocean currents,  which could also be disrupted, leading to unexpected shifts  in climates around the globe. As the IPCC puts it, “Never  before has humanity been forced to grapple with such an  immense environmental crisis.”    figure 1.5 | widespread impacts attributed to climate change  based on the available scientific literature since the ar4  note The latest scientific research finds “substantially more impacts in recent decades now attributed to climate change.” Note that the chart above shows only those impacts for which causality  has been demonstrated for climate change. Other impacts may be linked to global warming in the future, so the list could grow. source IPCC-AR5-SPM.    1  1.2.4 extreme events  Since 1950, some of the changes in extreme weather and  climate events have been linked to human influences.  Extremely cold temperatures have decreased, while  extremely high temperatures have become more frequent.  There is also been a noted increase in heavy precipitation in  various reasons. Heat waves have become more common in  Europe, Asia, and Australia. The impacts of heat waves,  droughts, floods, cyclones, and wildfires have revealed the  “significant vulnerability and exposure of some ecosystems  and many human systems to current climate variability”  (IPCC-AR5-SPM).  If civilization continues to emit greenhouse gases, further  warming is highly likely, with long-term, irreversible, and severe  impacts on the entire climate. To prevent this calamity,  greenhouse gas emissions need to be substantially reduced.  Even then, significant resources will need to be devoted to future  climate adaptation from current emissions (IPCC-AR5-SPM).  1.3 nuclear threats  Nuclear energy is a relatively minor industry with major  problems. Currently covering just 2.3 per cent of the world’s  final energy consumption, nuclear’s share is set to decline  over the coming decades.  The amount of nuclear capacity added during last 15 years  (2000-2014: 20,000 MW) (WNISR 2015)2 was 17 times less  than the new wind capacity built in the same period (356,000  MW) (REN21-2015).3 Those new wind generators have a  potential annual generation of 900 TWh – equal to 120  nuclear reactors with a capacity of 1000MW each.  Despite the rhetoric of a ‘nuclear renaissance’ – a term the  nuclear industry has used since around 2001, the industry is  struggling with massive cost increases, construction delays  and safety and security problems. japan’s major nuclear  accident at fukushima following a tsunami came 25 years  after the disastrous explosion in the Chernobyl nuclear power  plant in the former Soviet union, showing that nuclear energy  is an inherently unsafe source of power. As a result, Siemens  declared its exit from the nuclear power sector in 2011 and  now only focuses on the delivery of spare parts for the existing  reactors along with operation and maintenance service.  following the fukushima accident, the German Parliament  resolved to shut all nuclear power plants by 2022,4 including  immediate the immediate closure of nearly half of them. That  same year, Germany also passed a set of laws to further  boost renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies.  In the wake of the fukushima accident, 95% of Italians also  voted in a plebiscite to reject nuclear energy. At the start of  2012, over 90% of the japan’s reactors were offline. There  have been no significant problems with the electricity supply  with only 3 of 54 in operation.    1.3.1 no solution to climate protection  The nuclear industry promises that nuclear energy can  contribute to both climate protection and energy security;  however, their claims need to be reality-checked.  The most recent World Energy Outlook 2015 and the Special  Energy and Climate Report published by the International  Energy Agency,5 includes a bridge scenario for a future  energy mix to keep global carbon concentration below  450ppm. While renewables and energy efficiency play the  largest role to achieve this target, a large expansion of  nuclear power up to 2030 is still included. The technical  assumption is that the installed capacity will be increased  from 392 GW in 2013 up to 552 GW in 2030 – an additional  150 GW. To reach this goal, 10 GW – 7 to 10 nuclear reactors  – need to come on line every year, an extremely unlikely given  the “performance” of the nuclear industry. This pathway  would be very expensive and hazardous, while hardly helping  to reduce the emission of greenhouse gases. A more realistic  analysis shows:  • The IEA scenario assumes investment costs of  uS$ 4,800/kWe installed, in line with what the industry has  been promising. The reality indicates costs of new plant are  three to four times higher (see box).  • Massive expansion of nuclear energy comes with an  increase in related hazards: the risk of serious reactor  accidents like in fukushima, japan; the growing stockpiles  of deadly high level radioactive waste which will need to be  safeguarded for hundreds of thousands of years; and  potential proliferation of both nuclear technologies and  materials through diversion to military or terrorist use.  • Climate science says that we need to reach a peak of  global greenhouse gas emissions before 2020. Even if the  world’s governments decided on strong nuclear expansion  now, not a single new reactor would start generating  electricity before 2020 because it typically takes at least ten  years from decision to commissioning. Any significant  contribution from nuclear power towards reducing  emissions would come too late to help save the climate.  1.3.2 the dangers of nuclear power  Electricity from nuclear power does produce less carbon  dioxide than fossil fuels, but nuclear power poses multiple  threats to people and the environment during operation. The  main risks are for safety of the reaction, nuclear waste  disposal and nuclear proliferation. These three risks are  detailed below and are the reasons nuclear power has been  discounted as a future technology in the Energy [R]evolution  Scenario.  safety risks  Several hundred accidents have occurred in the nuclear  energy industry since it began, including Windscale (1957),  Three Mile Island (1979), Chernobyl (1986), Tokaimura (1999)  and fukushima (2011). Despite the nuclear industry’s  assurances that a nuclear accident of the Chernobyl scale  could never happen again, an earthquake and subsequent  tsunami in japan caused leaks and explosions in four  reactors at the Daiichi nuclear power plant. Large areas  around the plant have been seriously contaminated with  radioactivity from the plant. Areas up to 50 km from the  facility have been evacuated, and food and water restrictions  apply at distances exceeding 100 km. The impacts on the  lives of hundreds of thousands of people and on the  japanese economy will be felt for decades to come. The  fukushima disaster proves the inherent safety problems with  nuclear energy.  • All existing nuclear reactors need continuous power to cool  the reactors and the spent nuclear fuel, even after the  reactor has shut down. In 2006, the emergency power  systems failed at the Swedish forsmark plant for 20  minutes during a power outage, and four of Sweden’s ten  nuclear power stations had to be shut down. If power had  not been restored, there could have been a major incident  within hours.  • A nuclear chain reaction must be kept under control, and  harmful radiation must, as far as possible, be contained  within the reactor, with radioactive products isolated from  humans and carefully managed. Nuclear reactions generate  high temperatures, and fluids used for cooling are often  kept under pressure. Together with the intense radioactivity,  these high temperatures and pressures make operating a  reactor difficult and complex.  • The risks from operating reactors are increasing, and the  likelihood of an accident is now higher than ever. Most of  the world’s reactors are more than 25 years old and  therefore more prone to age-related failures. Many utilities  are attempting to extend the life of their reactors, which  were designed to last only 30 years, up to 60 years, which  poses new risks.    • A series of institutional failures set the stage for the  fukushima Daiichi disaster including a system of industry-led  self-regulation, the industry’s overconfidence, its  inherently dismissive attitude towards nuclear risks, and its  neglect of scientific evidence. Institutional failures are the  main cause of all past nuclear accidents, but the nuclear  industry’s risk assessments fail to take those into account.  • Nuclear utilities are reducing safety-related investments  and have limited staff numbers, but they are increasing  reactor pressure and operational temperature and the burnup  of the fuel. This accelerates ageing and decreases  safety margins.  nuclear waste  Despite 50 years radioactive waste, there is no solution for  the long-term storage and safeguarding of these dangerous  materials. Disposal sites of low-level radioactive waste have  already started leaking after only decades, even though  highly radioactive waste needs to be safely contained for  hundreds of thousands of years. The nuclear industry claims  it can ‘dispose’ of its nuclear waste by burying it deep  underground, but this approach will not isolate the  radioactive material from the environment forever. A deep  dump only slows down the release of radioactivity into the  environment. Power plant developers try to predict how fast  a dump will leak so that it can claim that radiation doses to  the public living nearby in the future will be “acceptably low”.  but scientific understanding is not sufficiently advanced to  make such predictions with any certainty.  As part of a campaign to build new nuclear stations around  the world, the industry claims that public acceptability, not  technical obstacles, is the main problem that burying  radioactive waste faces. It cites nuclear dumping proposals in  finland and Sweden but without scientific backing for its  claims of safe disposal.  The most hazardous waste is the spent fuel removed from  nuclear reactors, which stays radioactive for hundreds of  thousands of years. In some countries, the situation is  exacerbated by ‘reprocessing’ this spent fuel, which involves  dissolving it in nitric acid to separate out weapons-usable  plutonium. This process leaves behind a highly radioactive  liquid waste. There are about 270,000 tonnes of spent  nuclear waste fuel in storage, much of it at reactor sites.  Spent fuel is accumulating at around 12,000 tonnes per year,  with around a quarter of that used for reprocessing.6  The least damaging option for waste already in existence is to  store it above ground, in dry storage at the site of origin.  However, this option also presents major challenges and  threats, as was seen in the fukushima accident where there  was major disruption to the cooling of the spent nuclear fuel.  The only real solution is to stop producing the waste.  nuclear proliferation  Manufacturing a nuclear bomb requires fissile material - either  uranium-235 or plutonium-239. Most nuclear reactors use  uranium as a fuel and produce plutonium during operation. It  is impossible to adequately prevent the diversion of  plutonium to nuclear weapons. A small-scale plutonium  separation plant can be built in four to six months, so any  country with an ordinary reactor can produce nuclear  weapons relatively quickly.  As a result, nuclear power and nuclear weapons have grown  up like Siamese twins. Since international controls on nuclear  proliferation began, Israel, India, Pakistan and North korea  have all obtained nuclear weapons; aside from Israel and  North korea, all of these countries also have nuclear power  plants. The tasks of International Atomic Energy Agency  (IAEA) and the Nuclear Non-proliferation Treaty (NPT) are  inherently contradictory: to promote the development of  ‘peaceful’ nuclear power whilst at the same time trying to  stop the spread of nuclear weapons.  Israel, India and Pakistan all used their civil nuclear  operations to develop weapons capability, operating outside  international safeguards. North korea developed a nuclear  weapon even as a signatory of the NPT. A major challenge to  nuclear proliferation controls has been the spread of uranium  enrichment technology to Iran, Libya and North korea. The  former Director General of the International Atomic Energy  Agency, Mohamed Elbaradei, has said that “should a state  with a fully developed fuel-cycle capability decide, for  whatever reason, to break away from its non-proliferation  commitments, most experts believe it could produce a  nuclear weapon within a matter of months”.7  The united Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate  Change has also warned that the security threat of trying to  tackle climate change with a global fast-breeder programme  (using plutonium fuel) “would be colossal”.8 All of the reactor  designs currently being promoted around the world could be  fuelled partly with MOx (mixed oxide fuel), from which  plutonium can be easily separated.  Restricting the production of fissile material to a few ‘trusted’  countries will not work. Instead, it would create greater  security threats through inequity and resentment. A new uN  agency is needed to tackle the twin threats of climate change  and nuclear proliferation by phasing out nuclear power and  promoting sustainable energy, which would promote world  peace rather than threaten it.  Climate and Energy Policy  image nine Million cadMiuM telluride solar Modules now cover Part of carrizo Plain in southern california. the Modules are Part of toPaz solar farM, one of the largest Photovoltaic  Power Plants in the world. at 9.5 square Miles (25.6 square kiloMeters), the facility is about one-third the size of Manhattan island, or the equivalent of 4,600 football fields. when  oPerating at full caPacity, the 550-Megawatt Plant Produces enough electricity to Power about 180,000 hoMes. that is enough to disPlace about 407,000 Metric tonnes of carbon dioxide  Per year, the equivalent of taking 77,000 cars off the road.  international climate policy -  the unfccc and the kyoto  protocol  renewable energy policies policy recommendations  win-win-strategy:  reducing carbon  emissions with  renewables”  “  © nasa landsat  To make the Energy [R]evolution a reality, immediate political  action is required. There are no economic or technical  barriers to move to 100% renewable energy. Governments  regulate energy markets, both for supply and demand; they  can educate everyone from consumers to industrialists and  stimulate the market for renewable energy and energy  efficiency by implementing a wide range of economic  mechanisms. They can also build on the successful policies  already adopted by other countries. To get started,  governments need to agree on further binding emission  reduction commitments under the uNfCCC process.  2.1 international climate policy - the unfccc  and the kyoto protocol  Recognising the global threats of climate change, the  signatories to the 1992 uN framework Convention on  Climate Change (uNfCCC) followed up with the kyoto  Protocol in 1997. It entered into force in early 2005, and its  193 members meet continuously to negotiate further  refinement and development of the agreement. Only one  major industrialised nation, the united States, has not ratified  the protocol. In 2011, Canada announced its intention to  withdraw from the Protocol.  In Copenhagen in 2009, the 195 members of the uNfCCC  were supposed to deliver a new climate change agreement  towards ambitious and fair emission reductions.  unfortunately, they failed at this conference.  At the 2012 Conference of the Parties in Durban, there was  agreement to reach a new agreement by 2015 and adopt a  second commitment period at the end of 2012.  During the 2014 conference in Lima, the uS and other  developed countries emphasised the need to be “realistic”  and “nationally determined” with future emission cuts, and  resisted stronger action on finance and adaptation, in  particular for the most vulnerable countries. India and China,  on the other hand, allied with oil-producing states in an effort  to protect themselves from taking on tougher and more  binding emissions cuts in the future. The result was a messy  compromise that sets no common time frame for future  pollution cuts. While the Lima decision does require countries  to submit basic information about the climate actions they  plan to include in the next conference agreement (Paris -  COP21 in 2015), it also downgrades the proposed  assessment of the fairness and adequacy of countries’  contributions partly as a result of pressure from China and  India. Instead, the secretariat is to compile a mere technical  paper assessing the aggregate effect of the targets.  The outcome in Lima established no clear requirement for  rich countries to include climate finance in their reported  actions before Paris, nor does it establish a clear road-map  for scaling up finance towards the 100 billion dollars a year  promised by 2020. However, over time it does put adaptation  on a more equal footing with emission reductions.  In December 2015, the global community will meet in Paris  for the 21st uN Conference of the Parties (COP21) to  negotiate and sign a new global agreement to address  dangerous global warming. The success of the Paris COP  hinges upon countries agreeing to support a vision for 100%  clean renewable energy by 2050 and increased forest  protection. The formal negotiating text was released in March  2015 and further negotiated in bonn from 1-11 june 2015.  Meanwhile, the global emissions landscape is changing  rapidly. As a result of declining coal consumption in China,  global energy-related CO2 emissions remained stable in 2014  for the first time in 40 years, despite continued economic  growth. If global mitigation endeavours are strengthened, this  trend is set to continue. This new landscape provides a  greater chance that the coal, oil and nuclear industries –  which continue to fight to maintain their dominance by  propagating the outdated notion that citizens need their dirty  energy – will face dramatic changes in both energy markets  and support from governments.  countries´ commitments Countries’ national commitments  (also known as intended nationally determined contributions -  INDCs) are key components of the Paris agreement as they  are the tools for immediate and drastic emissions cuts.  Parties were asked to submit their proposed mitigation  commitments well in advance of the Paris conference. Thus  far, several major emitters, including China, have already  presented their plans. It is crucial that the remaining countries  submit as soon as possible.  international climate policy - looking ahead Countries should  not only present their short-term commitments, based on  5-year periods, but also outline long-term plans for a just  transition to an economy built on 100% clean renewable  energy. Countries should include other policy commitments in  their INDCs, such as renewable energy and energy efficiency  targets along with commitments to stop fossil fuel subsidies.  Rich countries and other countries in a position to do so  should also address the question of climate finance in their  commitments to ensure predictability and adequacy for  vulnerable countries.  an effective climate agreement should include strong short-term  action and set out a clear long-term pathway. key  elements include the following:  • a strong long-term goal: Phase-out of fossil fuels and nuclear  power by 2050 through a just transition towards 100%  renewable energy, as well as the protection and restoration of  forests. A clear signal to decision-makers and investors at  all levels that the world is moving towards phasing out  carbon emissions entirely and accelerating the transition to  100% renewable energy is needed. Countries’ short-term  emission reduction commitments must align with this longterm  goal and support transformational change, ensuring  both fairness and solidarity.    • a 5-year cycle process for country commitments starting 2020  All countries’ commitments should follow a 5-year  commitment period starting in 2020, which would form the  first period of the Paris Protocol. Moving forward, each  period would further deepen the commitments, allowing no  back-sliding. 5-year commitment periods incentivize early  action, allow for dynamic political responses and avoid  locking in low levels of ambition. They allow for a timely  adaptation to the technological advances of renewable  energies and energy efficiency.  • legally binding: A legally binding protocol - including  common accounting rules for mitigation and finance - will  compel leaders to act in a strong way; legally binding  obligations are the real expressions of political will,  ensuring durability in the face of political changes and  increased ambition over time.  • shifting subsidies away from fossil fuels. All countries should  commit to phase-out all subsidies- both production and  consumption - for fossil fuels until 2020 subsidies.  • strong commitment for adaptation, finance and loss and  damage: The Paris Protocol should acknowledge that less  mitigation action means a greater need for adaptation,  especially finance. Consequently, an adaptation goal  should be established to ensure that the level of support  meets vulnerable countries’ needs under the actual  warming anticipated. A roadmap must be decided in Paris  for how to meet the 100bn uSD commitment for climate  financing by 2020.  • bring down emissions before 2020. The gap between the  agreed upon goal of keeping warming below 2°C/1.5°C  and what countries actually intend to do by 2020 is widely  acknowledged. The pledges during time of writing of this  report (mid-2015) would lead us into a world of 3 or more  degrees warming, with all its devastating consequences for  humans and ecosystems. While a process on how to bring  the emissions down was established at COP17 in 2011,  countries are still – four years later – failing to agree upon  sufficient action to mitigate greenhouse gases. In Paris at  the latest, governments and corporate leaders need to  provide innovate solutions for breaking the stalemate and  laying the groundwork for bold actions before 2020.  2.1.1 international energy policy - energy policy  and market regulation  On many energy markets, renewable energy generators  currently compete with old nuclear and fossil fuel power  stations on an uneven playing field. Consumers and  taxpayers have already paid the interest and depreciation on  the original investments, so the generators are running at a  marginal cost. Political action is needed to overcome market  distortions so renewable energy technologies can compete  on their own merits.  While governments around the world are liberalising their  electricity markets, the increasing competitiveness of  renewable energy should lead to higher demand. Without  political support, however, renewable energy remains at a  disadvantage, marginalised after decades of massive financial,  political and structural support for conventional technologies.  Developing renewables will therefore require strong political  and economic efforts, for example through laws that guarantee  stable payment for up to 20 years. Renewable energy will also  contribute to sustainable economic growth, high quality jobs,  technology development, global competitiveness, and  industrial and research leadership.  2.2 renewable energy policies  In 2014, the global market trended towards increased levels of  renewable energy, with variable generation from wind and solar  leading the way. More electricity was used as a result, replacing  fuels both for heating and transport and changing energy  markets significantly, particularly in developed countries.  Global subsidies for fossil fuels and nuclear power remain high  despite reform efforts. Creating a level playing field can lead to  a more efficient allocation of financial resources, helping to  strengthen initiatives for the development and implementation  of energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies.  Removing fossil-fuel and nuclear subsidies globally would  more accurately reflect the true cost of energy generation.  Cost competitiveness per unit no longer remains a barrier;  however, grid-connected renewable energy power plants and  the secure transport and delivery of electricity represent an  increased investment risk because it leads to uncertainty for  overall electricity sales from RE plants. In 2014, there was a  growing trend to link several policies together (such as  renewable energy targets, feed-in tariffs or tendering, and  grid access). The movement towards 100% renewable energy  targets for regions, islands, large cities and whole countries  continued to grow over the course of 2014. The following  section about the status of renewable energy policies by the  end of 2014 is based on an analysis published by the  Renewable Energy Network for the 21st Century (REN21)  (REN21 – 2015).  2.2.1 status of renewable energy policies  for electricity  Targets and supporting policy tools to promote renewable  energy for power generation continued to receive the majority  of attention from policymakers, outpacing those set for the  heating, cooling, and transportation sectors.  • targets have been identified in 164 countries as of early  2015 and were added or revised in 11 countries in 2014.  • feed-in tariffs (fITs) have now been enacted in 108  jurisdictions at the national or state/provincial level. Egypt  was the only country adding a new national fIT in 2014, but  a number of existing policies were amended with changes  varying by region, continuing the trend in recent years.  Countries including bulgaria, Germany, Greece, Italy,  japan, Russia, Switzerland, and the Philippines reduced  rates, while rates were increased and/or eligibility was  expanded in Algeria, Denmark, Malaysia, Poland, and  vietnam. China enacted a slate of revisions, simultaneously  opening fITs to new technologies and reducing rates for  some previously covered technologies.  • tendering both technology-neutral and technology-specific  tendering continues to be adopted by a growing number of  countries, with 60 countries having utilized renewable  energy tenders as of early 2015. The European  Commission issued guidelines to begin a continent-wide  shift away from fITs towards tenders. Poland indicated its  intention to phase out its green certificate scheme in favor  of tenders.  • new net-metering policies were added in three countries, all  in Latin America.  • renewable Portfolio standards (rPs) policies continue to face  opposition in a number of uS States. In 2014, Ohio became  the first state to freeze its RPS, and in 2015 West virginia  became the first state to remove its (voluntary) RPS entirely.  An estimated 126 countries had adopted some form of  financial support policy to promote renewable energy  technologies by early 2015.  • barriers to renewable energy: Charges or fees on renewable  energy have been introduced in an increasing number of  countries. In Europe, Germany, Austria and Italy enacted  new charges on self-consumed solar Pv, joining fellow Eu  member states including the Czech Republic, Greece, and  Spain with fees and/or taxes on renewable energy output.  2.2.2 status of renewable energy policies for  heating and cooling  Policies for renewable heating and cooling are slowly gaining  more attention from national policymakers. An estimated 45  countries worldwide had targets for renewable heating or  cooling in place by early 2015. In Europe, the majority of  targets in Eu and Energy Community Member States have  been introduced through each country’s National Renewable  Energy Action Plan (NREAP), while other countries have  adopted technology specific targets focused on specified  capacity or new installations of renewable heating systems.  • solar-specific renewable heat mandates were in place in 12  countries at the national or state/provincial level, and  technology-neutral mandates were in place in an additional  9 countries by early 2015. South Africa was the only  country to institute a new mandate during 2014.  • financial incentives continued to be the most widely enacted  form of policy support for renewable heating and cooling  systems in 2014. Algeria, Chile, Romania, and Slovenia all  re-introduced incentive schemes that had expired in  previous years, the Czech Republic, India, and kenya  strengthened existing schemes, and the uS states of  Minnesota and New york established new rebate programs  in 2014.  2.2.3 renewable energy transport policies  The majority of transport-related policies continued to focus  on developments in the biofuel sector and road transport;  however, other modes of transportation are attracting  attention as well. Policies promoting the linkage between  electric vehicles and renewable energy have received little  attention to date.  The debate over the sustainability of first-generation biofuels  continued worldwide in 2014, with European energy minsters  agreeing to a 7% cap on the contribution of first-generation  biofuel to meet the Eu-wide 10% renewable transport fuel  target. Italy became the first country in Europe to enact a  mandate promoting a specific share (0.6% by 2018) of  second-generation biofuels.  biofuel blend mandates are now in place in 34 countries, with  32 national mandates and 26 state/provincial mandates.  Within these policy frameworks, 45 jurisdictions now  mandate specified shares of bioethanol, and 27 mandate  biodiesel blends, with many countries enacting both.  Argentina, brazil, Malaysia, Panama, vietnam, and the uS  state of Minnesota all strengthened existing blend mandates  in 2014.  2.2.4 city and local government renewable energy  policies  Cities continue to set and reach ambitious targets for  renewable energy use which are also influenced by regions  and countries with 100% renewable energy targets. joining a  growing global movement of cities, new 100% targets were  set in fukushima (japan) and Maui County, Hawaii (uSA).  burlington, vermont (uSA), reached its 100% renewable  electricity goal in 2014.  Municipal policymakers in countries including brazil, China,  India, and the united Arab Emirates continued a growing  trend of utilizing municipal oversight of build code regulations    to mandate the deployment of renewable power generation  and renewable heat technologies.  Public-private partnerships and community power systems are  increasingly being utilized to increase renewable energy at the  local level. In the united States, over 2,000 communities have  already created community power systems. An additional 800  have created electricity co-operatives to increase local control  over power generation, while the CO-POWER project was  inaugurated in Europe to support community power  development across 12 European countries.  District heating and cooling systems have emerged as an  important measure, helping to facilitate the scale-up of  renewable energy, with Dubai (uAE) and Paris (france)  leading in 2014. In Europe, primarily in northern countries  such as Denmark, large-scale solar thermal heating plants  are increasingly being developed for connections to district  heat networks.  Municipal policymakers continued to use their purchasing  authority to support renewable energy in their cities. Cities  such as Paris (france) and San francisco (uSA) purchased  electric and biofuel vehicles for city fleets, including buses  used in public transportation systems.  2.2.5 distributed renewable energy in developing  countries  More than one billion people or 15% of the global population  still lack access to a power grid. With a total installed  capacity of roughly 147 GW, all of Africa has less power  generation capacity than Germany. Moreover, approximately  2.9 billion people lack access to cleaner forms of cooking.  Energy companies invested about uSD 63.9 billion in off-grid  solar Pv in 2014. bank of America (uSA) pledged uSD 1  billion to help finance distributed renewable energy projects  that normally would not pass risk assessments. It also agreed  to seed a Catalytic finance Initiative to stimulate at least uSD  10 billion of new investment in high-impact clean energy  projects. The aim is for such initiatives to help develop  innovative financing mechanisms, reduce investment risk and  attract a broader range of institutional investors to the sector.  There were new initiatives related to clean cooking during  2014. In july, Ecuador started executing a plan to introduce  3 million solar induction cooktops by 2016. Guatemala  established a Cluster of Improved Cook Stoves and Clean  fuels, representing individuals and organizations who work in  these two areas. bangladesh announced a Country Action  Plan for Clean Cook Stoves. India launched the unnat Chulha  Abhiyan Programme to develop and deploy 2.75 million clean  stoves by 2017. Several African countries, including Nigeria  and Senegal, also have programs to distribute millions of  clean cook stoves.  Some 30 transnational programs and 20 global networks  support national distributed renewable energy programs. The  Sustainable Energy for All Initiative (SE4ALL), Power Africa  program, the Energizing Development Program, the Global  Alliance for Clean Cook Stoves, and the Global Lighting and  Energy Access Partnership are playing a key role in further  distribution of distributed renewable energy, especially in  least developed countries.  In addition to existing, well established technologies such as  solar home systems and micro hydro dams, 2014 witnessed  the evolution of new types of equipment, configurations, and  applications. Thermoelectric generator (TEG) stoves utilize  their own heat to produce power that operates the blower or  fan, eliminating the need for an external source of electricity  and increasing the efficiency of combustion. flexi-biogas  systems use balloon (or tube) digesters made from a  polyethylene or plastic bag, making them mobile and  extremely lightweight. Pico-wind turbines offer a very lowcost  technology for powering remote telecommunications.  Solar-powered irrigation kits enable farmers to grow highvalue  fruits and vegetables.  Ancillary services and monitoring are making use of  digitization, and the “internet of things” facilitates improved  after-sales, better customer service, and lower costs, enabling  companies to reach more customers. Solar direct current (DC)  micro-grids offer superior compatibility with certain electric  appliances and can eliminate the need for an inverter.  bundling of products and services together into hybridized or  integrated packaged systems— especially bundles that  promote electricity and appliance usage, telecommunications,  and/or cooking—are a high-impact innovation.  2.2.6 energy efficiency: renewable energy’s  twin pillar  Success stories for energy efficiency standards Efficiency  standards proved very successful in 2014. building standards  and the construction of passive houses were implemented,  as were standards for electrical appliances in several  developing and emerging economies. The focus has been on  efficiency improvements in road transport, including fuel  economy improvements in private vehicles, increased  penetration of electric (Ev) and hybrid (HEv) vehicles, and  shifts to more sustainable modes of travel.  In 2013, more than 150 cities around the world had  implemented some kind of building efficiency standard. by  2014, 81 countries had introduced energy standards and  labeling programs, as well as mandatory energy performance  standards covering 55 product types, with refrigerators, room  air conditioners, lighting, and televisions being the most  commonly regulated.  by the end of 2013, standards for electric motors used in  industrial applications had been introduced in 44 countries,  including brazil, China, South korea, and the united States.  As of late 2014, vehicle fuel economy standards covered 70%  of the world’s light-duty vehicle market.    2.3 policy recommendations  Countries around the world are at varying levels of  development with RE. While some are just starting to deploy  modern RE - beyond traditional biomass and hydro – others  have already reached high penetration levels, particular for  solar and wind in the electricity sector. Globally, policies have  largely driven the expansion of renewable energy. The number  of countries promoting renewables through direct policy  support continued to grow in 2014, albeit at varying rates and  in response to diverse drivers. As circumstances change and  level of RE increases, the policy mechanisms required will  change as well. While grid integration issues due to ever  increasing shares of wind and solar Pv are most pressing in  developed countries, access to technology and financial  resources is the highest priority in developing countries.  Policy frameworks must be stable and predictable in order to  underpin the sustained deployment of renewable energy. The  industry needs predictable policy frameworks in order to be  ready to invest, build up production capacities, develop new  technologies and expand skilled employees. Moreover, there  is a close correlation between supporting policies and the  cost of renewable energy technology.  Price support mechanisms for renewable energy are a  practical way to correct market failures in the electricity  sector. They aim to support market penetration of those  renewable energy technologies, such as wind and solar  thermal, that currently suffer from unfair competition due to  direct and indirect support to fossil fuel use and nuclear  energy, and to provide incentives for technology  improvements and cost reductions so that technologies such  as Pv, wave and tidal can compete with conventional sources  in the future.  Overall, there are two types of incentive to promote the  deployment of renewable energy. These are fixed Price  Systems and Renewable Quota Systems (referred to in the  uS as Renewable Portfolio Standards). In the former, the  government sets the price (or premium) paid to the power  producer and lets the market determine the quantity; in the  latter, the government sets the quantity of renewable  electricity and leaves it to the market to determine the price.  both systems create a protected market against a  background of subsidised, depreciated conventional  generators whose external environmental costs are not  accounted for. These policies provide incentives for  technology improvements and cost reductions, leading to  cheaper renewables that will be able to compete with  conventional sources in the future.  The main difference between quota-based and price-based  systems is that the former tends to promote the renewable  energy source that is the cheapest, which is generally  onshore wind power. In doing so, this policy thus gives the  most support to the energy source that needs the least. In  contrast, price-based policies spread support across  numerous renewable energy sources more equally, including  those that are currently more expensive and need greater  support. In doing so, they ramp up fledgling industries to  bring costs down.  However, competition between technology manufacturers is  the most crucial factor in bringing down electricity production  costs. Only if large volumes of equipment can be  manufactured, cost reduction potential can be fully exploited.  So the goal of fighter policy should be large-scale  deployment towards bringing about economies of scale  among manufacturers.  A bankable support scheme for renewable energy projects  provide long-term stability and lead to lower “soft costs” (less  red tape). In any case, renewable power generation requires  priority access and dispatch on the power grid so renewables  are not curtailed in favour of more polluting power sources.  The substantial cost reductions of renewables are largely the  result of policy support, which has attracted significant  investments leading to economies of scale. However, abrupt  policy change of policies, such as a sudden reversal of feedin  tariffs, can have major negative impacts for the industry as  a whole. Therefore, any transition towards a new policy  system requires sufficient time, both in the lead-up to  implementation and in duration of the new policy itself so that  industry can adapt its business model.  Today, the penetration of renewables is no longer a question  of technology or economics but one of developing more  flexible markets, smarter energy systems and – especially for  developing countries – access to finance. This policy shift  must be underpinned by the appropriate regulations,  business, and finance models.  100% renewables: aiming high to drive the transition  High targets for renewable energy – across all sectors –  trigger innovation. A complete transition towards renewable  energy requires the development of new policies to support  business models in an ever changing energy market design.  Setting ambitious long-term renewable energy targets will  help to organize the energy transition across all three sectors.  Thus new policies are needed to restructure the electric  power and heating markets, and to develop regulations to  provide a fair and efficient basis for blending centralized and  distributed generation with demand-flexibility measures. Our  thinking about future energy systems needs to focus on how  existing infrastructure must be adapted and enhanced to  accommodate the ongoing integration of large shares of  renewable energy.    harnessing local action to ensure global renewable energy uptake  Today, local governments are leaders in the advancement of  renewable energy, particularly in combination with energy  efficiency improvements. They regularly exceed efforts made  by state, provincial, and national governments. Motivated to  create local jobs, reduce energy costs, address pollution  issues, and advance their sustainability goals, hundreds of  local governments worldwide have set renewable energy  targets and enacted fiscal incentives or other policies to  foster the deployment of renewables. Governments at the  community, city, regional, island, and even country levels  have begun to forge their own transition pathways towards a  100% renewable energy future. A better linking of local  renewable energy developments with those at the national  level will be key to driving the energy transition.  creating a level playing field for the entire energy sector  Global subsidies for fossil fuels and nuclear power remain  high despite reform efforts. The exact level of subsides is  unknown; estimates range from uSD 544 billion (World bank)  to uSD 1.9 trillion per year (International Monetary fund),  depending on how “subsidy” is defined. Whichever number is  chosen, subsidies for fossil fuels and nuclear power are  significantly higher than financial support for renewables.  Electricity price subsidies for consumers in developing  countries should be shifted towards Distributed Renewable  Energy (DRE). Creating a level playing field can lead to a more  efficient allocation of financial resources, helping to  strengthen initiatives for the development and implementation  of energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies.  Removing fossil-fuel and nuclear subsidies globally would  reflect more accurately the true cost of energy generation.  improving energy data to monitor advancements in achieving a  renewable energy transition  Reliable, timely, and regularly updated data on renewable  energy are essential for establishing energy plans, defining  targets, designing and continuously evaluating policy  measures, and attracting investment. The data situation for  renewable energy – especially in the power sector - has  improved significantly in recent years. better record-keeping,  accessibility, and advances in communication and collection  methods have contributed greatly to this development.  Nonetheless, the availability, accessibility, and quality of data  for distributed renewable energy and bioenergy is still poor.  To overcome some of these existing data gaps, it is essential  to develop innovative and collaborative approaches to data  collection, processing, and validation. until recently,  “acceptable data” have been limited to official statistics  (formal data). for an accurate and timely understanding of  the status of the renewable energy sector, official renewable  energy data need to be supplemented with informal data.  The addition of informal data can improve coverage of  sectors and regions and help resolve the lack of data;  however, previously uninvolved players from varying sectors  would then need to be involved. Many of these individual and  institutional actors typically have already engaged in some  form of data collection but are unaware of the importance of  their data or lack the means of sharing them. Additionally,  cross-sector methods and approaches for data collection  must be considered. by utilizing links between energy and  other sectors, such as health and agriculture, data gaps can  be filled and data quality improved. There is a critical need to  broaden the definition of renewable energy data, to collect  data in a regular and more systematic manner, and to  increase transparency.  renewable power: (energy) system thinking required in  developed countries  With increased shares of variable solar and wind power  generation, a variety of technologies need to be integrated in  one resilient power supply system. Thus, policy  developments should shift away from single-technology  support schemes towards ones that support a combination of  diverse technologies. Policies need to transform power grids  to become more flexible, increase demand-side integration,  and integrate power systems with transport, buildings,  industry, and heating and cooling sectors.  utilities and grid operators will also play an important role in  managing demand and generation in renewable energydominated  energy systems. Demand-side management of  industries, transport systems and households and the  operation of distributed generation fleets require different  energy policies to enable new business models. Achieving a  renewable energy technology mix which can be used for  dispatching - also across the power, heating/cooling and  transport sector - is important.  Heating systems, such as heat pumps or district heating  networks can be used to better integrate solar and wind  power. The German “Energiewende” (German for “energy  transition”) has inspired many countries, helping to build new  momentum around renewable energy. Experiences with  system integration in industrialized countries such as Spain,  Germany, Denmark and the uS can help develop future  concepts for developing countries to help establish trust that  energy supply can fundamentally build on RE.  the renewable heating and cooling sector lacks progress  To achieve the transition towards renewable energy, more  attention needs to be paid to the heating and cooling sectors,  as well as to integrated approaches that facilitate the use of  renewables in this sector. Globally, heating and cooling  accounts for almost half of total global energy demand.  However, this sector continues to lag far behind the    renewable power sector when it comes to policies that  support technology development and deployment. Policies  should make sure that specific targets and appropriate  measures to support renewable heating and cooling are part  of any national renewable energy strategy. They should  include financial incentives; awareness-raising campaigns;  training for installers, architects and heating engineers; and  demonstration projects.  for new buildings and those undergoing major renovation, a  minimum share of heat consumption from renewable energy  should be required, as is already implemented in some  countries. At the same time, increased R&D efforts should be  undertaken, particularly in the fields of heat storage and  renewable cooling. Mandatory regulations in the building  sector can also help increase the penetration of renewable  technologies. Improving the accuracy of national data  collection on heating and cooling supply and demand is also  important. The distributed nature of heat supply and local  demand make it difficult to know what sources are available  and what is needed; this information is crucial for good policy  development. The expansion of district heating networks  supports both the development of renewable energy heating  and benefits the integration of variable power generation.  Heating networks can be utilized for demand side  management, relieving pressure on power grids. A smart  combination of heating and power grids can also reduce the  need for grid expansion, decreasing costs further.  getting the policy mix right in developing countries  In developing countries, access to financial resources,  technology, and information is key. Many developing  countries also have a steep energy demand, particularly in  the industrial sector. Ensuring the energy supply for heavy  industries and for small and medium enterprises is crucial for  the economic development of these countries. With  renewable energy – modular and highly standardized power  technologies – expanding energy supply for all consumer  groups is not a technological, but a political challenge.  Access to expertise and financial resources requires stable,  long-term energy policies.  There is also an urgent need to address the lack of access to  energy services and inefficiencies in the provision of energy  services to the urban poor and rural communities. Improved  energy access is crucial towards advancing the quality of life  and socio-economic status of these populations, in turn  contributing to political stability on national, regional and  international levels and helping to improve economic growth  and environmental sustainability. Renewables have a key role  to play in increasing access through distributed solutions.  Stand-alone cooking and electricity systems based on  renewables are often the most cost-effective options  available for providing energy services to households and  businesses in remote areas. Supporting the development of  distributed renewable energy-based systems to expand  energy access is essential. Combined with information and  communication technology (ICT) applications for power  management and end-user services, recent technical  advances that enable the integration of renewables in minigrid  systems allow for rapid growth in the use of mini-grids  powered with renewables.  There is growing awareness that off-grid, low-income  customers can provide fast-growing markets for goods and  services. The emergence of new business and financing  models to serve them means that these energy markets are  increasingly recognized as offering potential business  opportunities. Despite some progress on expanding energy  access in different parts of the world, some 1.3 billion people  still lack access to electricity, and more than 2.6 billion  people rely on traditional biomass for cooking and heating,  with the related negative health impacts. In order to support  the expansion of energy markets to reach full energy access  – as promoted by SE4ALL – the public and private sector  need to actively work together to ensure the financing of  distributed renewable energy by developing and  implementing support policies, establishing broader legal  frameworks, and ensuring political stability.  efficiency: set stringent efficiency and emissions standards for  appliances, buildings, power plants and vehicles  Policies and measures to promote energy efficiency exist in  many countries. Energy and information labels, mandatory  minimum energy performance standards and voluntary  efficiency agreements are the most popular measures.  Effective government policies usually contain two elements -  those that use standards to push the market and those that  use incentives to pull. both are an effective, low cost way to  transition to greater energy efficiency.  The japanese front-runner programme, for example, is a  regulatory scheme with mandatory targets which gives  incentives to manufacturers and importers of energy-consuming  equipment to continuously improve the efficiency  of their products. It operates by allowing today’s best models  on the market to set the level for future standards.  32    2  33  support innovation in energy efficiency, low carbon transport  systems and renewable energy production  Innovation will play an important role in the Energy [R]evolution,  and it is needed for ever-improving efficiency and emissions  standards. Programmes supporting renewable energy and  energy efficiency are a traditional focus of energy and  environmental policies because energy innovations face  barriers all along the energy supply chain (from R&D to  demonstration projects and widespread deployment). Direct  government support through a variety of fiscal instruments,  such as tax incentives, is vital to hasten deployment of radically  new technologies that face a lack of industry investment. There  is thus a role for the public sector towards increasing  investments directly and in correcting market and regulatory  obstacles that inhibit investment in new technology.  Governments need to invest in research and development for  more efficient appliances and building techniques, new forms  of insulation, new types of renewable energy production  (such as tidal and wave power), and a low-carbon transport  future, such as the development of better batteries for plugin  electric cars and renewable fuels for aviation. Governments  need to engage in innovation themselves, both through  publicly funded research and by supporting private research  and development.  There are numerous ways to support innovation. The most  important policies are those that reduce the cost of research  and development, such as tax incentives, staff subsidies and  project grants. financial support for research and  development on ‘dead end’ energy solutions such as nuclear  fusion should be diverted to supporting renewable energy,  energy efficiency and distributed energy solutions.  transport  • emissions standards: Governments should regulate the  efficiency of private cars and other transport vehicles in  order to push manufacturers to reduce emissions through  downsizing, design and technology improvement.  Improvements in efficiency will reduce CO2 emissions  irrespective of the fuel used. Afterwards, further reductions  could be achieved with low-emission fuels. Emissions  standards should provide for a mandatory average  reduction of 5g CO2 /km/year in industrialised countries. To  dissuade car makers from overpowering high-end cars, a  maximum CO2 emissions limit for individual car models  should be introduced.  • electric vehicles: Governments should develop incentives to  promote the further development of electric cars and other  efficient and sustainable low-carbon transport  technologies. Linking electric cars to a renewable energy  grid is the best possible option to reduce emissions from  the transport sector.  • transport demand management: : Governments should invest  in developing, improving and promoting low emission  transport options, such as public and non-motorised  transport, freight transport management programmes,  teleworking and more efficient land use planning in order to  limit journeys.  the key requirements for effective (renewable) energy policies are:  • long-term security for the investment: Investors need to know  if energy policy will remain stable over the entire investment  period (until the generator is paid off). Investors want a  good return on investment, and while there is no universal  definition of a “good return,” it depends to a large extent on  the inflation rate of the country. Germany, for example, has  an average inflation rate of 2% per year and a minimum  return of investment expected by the financial sector is 6%  to 7%. Achieving 10% to 15% returns is seen as extremely  good and everything above 20% is seen as suspicious.  • long-term security for market conditions: Investor need to  know if the electricity or heat from the power plant can be  sold to the market for a price that guarantees a good return  on investment (ROI). If the ROI is high, the financial sector  will invest, it is low compared to other investments, and  financial institutions will not invest.  • transparent Planning Process: A transparent planning  process is key for project developers, so they can sell the  planned project to investors or utilities. The entire licensing  process must be clear and transparent.  • access to the grid: fair access to the grid is essential for  renewable power plants. If no grid connection is available  or if the costs to access the grid are too high, the project  will not be built. In order to operate a power plant, investors  must know if the asset can reliably deliver and sell  electricity to the grid. If a specific power plant (such as a  wind farm) does not have priority access to the grid, the  operator might have to switch the plant off when there is an  oversupply from other power plants or a bottleneck in the  grid. This arrangement can add high risk to the project  financing, which might then not be financed or only with a  “risk-premium” that lowers the ROI.    bankable renewable energy support schemes  Since the early development of renewable energies within the  power sector, there has been an on-going debate about the  best and most effective type of support scheme. The  European Commission published a survey in December 2005,  which concluded that feed -in tariffs are by far the most  efficient and successful mechanism. A more recent update of  this report, presented in March 2010 at the IEA Renewable  Energy Workshop by the fraunhofer Institute underscores the  same conclusion. The Stern Review on the Economics of  Climate Change also concluded that feed -in tariffs “achieve  larger deployment at lower costs”. Globally more than 40  countries have adopted some version of the system.  Although the organisational form of these tariffs differs from  country to country, some criteria have emerged as essential  for successful renewable energy policy. At the heart of these  is a reliable, bankable support scheme for renewable projects  to provide long-term stability and certainty. bankable support  schemes result in lower-cost projects because they lower the  risk for both investors and equipment suppliers. The cost of  wind power in Germany is up to 40% cheaper than in the  united kingdom, for example, partly because the support  system is more secure and reliable.  for developing countries, feed-in laws would be an ideal  mechanism to boost the development of new renewable  energy. The extra costs to consumers’ electricity bills are an  obstacle for countries with low average incomes. However,  countries that build wind and solar projects today do not face  the high costs that Germany, for instance, did only a few years  ago, so the cost impact on countries that start now will be  much lower. In order to enable technology transfer from Annex  1 countries under the kyoto Protocol to developing countries,  a mix of a feed-in laws, international finance, and emissions  trading could establish a locally based renewable energy  infrastructure and industry with help from wealthier countries.  finance for renewable energy projects is one of the main  obstacles in developing countries. While large-scale projects  have fewer funding problems, there are difficulties for small,  community-based projects, even though they have a high  degree of public support. The experience from micro credits for  small hydro projects in bangladesh, for example, and wind  farms in Denmark and Germany shows how economic benefits  can flow to local communities. With careful project planning  based on good local knowledge and understanding, projects  can achieve local involvement and acceptance. When the  community identifies with the project (as opposed to the  project being forced on the community), the result is generally  faster bottom-up growth of the renewable energy sector.  the four main elements for successful renewable energy support  schemes are therefore:  • a clear, bankable pricing system.  • Priority access to the grid with clear identification of who is  responsible for the connection, and how it is incentivised.  • Clear, simple administrative and planning permission  procedures.  • Public acceptance/support.  The first is fundamental, but it is insufficient without the other  three elements.  greenpeace and the renewable industry: required changes in the  energy sector:  Greenpeace and the renewable energy industry share a clear  agenda for the policy changes which need to be made to  encourage a shift to renewable sources.  the main demands are:  1. Phase out all subsidies for fossil fuels and nuclear energy.  2. internalise external (social and environmental) costs through  carbon taxation and/or ‘cap and trade’ emissions trading.  3. mandate strict efficiency standards for all energy consuming  appliances, buildings and vehicles.  4. establish legally binding targets for renewable energy and  combined heat and power generation.  5. set ambitious and mandatory targets for the short, mid and  long term along with supportive policies for their  implementation;  6. reform electricity markets by guaranteeing priority access to  the grid for renewable power generators.  7. establish cross-sectorial re support schemes to exploit  synergies between the power, heating/cooling and transport  sectors.  8. Provide defined and stable returns for investors, for example  through feed-in tariff payments.  9. if changing circumstances, such as plummeting costs, require  a transition to new policy mechanisms, interruption must be  avoided and predictability needs to remain for investors;  10. increase research and development budgets for renewable  energy and energy efficiency.    t h e e n e r gy [ r ] e v o lu t i o n c o n c e P t    Since the first Energy [R]evolution was published a  decade ago, the energy sector has changed significantly.  Renewable energy technologies have become mainstream  in most countries as a consequence of dramatically  reduced costs. A future renewable energy supply is no  longer science fiction, but work in progress.  However, growth rates of renewables – especially in the  heating/cooling sector and in transport – are far too slow  to achieve energy-related CO2 reductions required to  avoid dangerous climate change. A fundamental shift in  the way we consume and generate energy must begin  immediately and be well underway before 2020 in order to  avert the worst impacts of climate change.1 We need to  limit global warming to less than 2° Celsius, above which  the impacts become devastating.  3.1 status quo of the global energy sector  Every day, The International Energy Agency published an  evaluation of the current development of the Energy Sector in  May 2015 (IEA – TCEP 2015),2 which concluded that the  implementation of renewables and energy efficiency is  successful but too slow to meet the 2°C target. Here are  some of the IEA’s conclusions:  Costs: Increasingly, renewables are competitive with new  fossil fuel plants, and the cost gap between renewable  electricity and fossil power from new plants is closing  worldwide. Nonetheless, markets still do not reflect the true  environmental cost of power generation from fossil fuels.  Policy: Power markets must be redesigned to accommodate  variable, distributed renewables. Obstacles still exist for the  financing of renewable energy projects and grid connections,  thereby slowing down the transition. but the worst policy  mistakes are uncertainty and retroactive changes.  technology: Cogeneration and renewable heat have both  grown in absolute terms, but are not increasing quickly  enough as a share of energy supply. The share of  cogeneration in power supply has even stagnated. Likewise,  battery storage has mainly been developed for mobility up to  now but is increasingly used for frequency regulation to  integrate a greater share of variable renewables.  mobility: Electric vehicles are catching on, with an increasing  number of manufacturers now offering hybrid and electric  options. fuel efficiency standards have also made light  vehicles more efficient. The standard should now be applied  to larger trucks and buses.  buildings: The technologies are available, and targets are in  place in many regions. However, the rate and depth of  energy-efficient renovations needs to increase for true  progress to be made in this sector because the building stock  has a service life counted in decades.  The Renewable Policy Network for the 21st Century (REN21)  has undertaken a global renewable market analysis each year  in june since 2004. The publication – “Renewables – Global  Status Report” – is among the most comprehensive global  and national surveys of the renewable industry sector.  According to their latest edition, the global renewable energy  market in 2014 was dominated by three power generation  technologies: Solar photovoltaics (Pv), wind, and hydro.  Combined, these technologies added 127 GW of new power  generation capacity worldwide. by year’s end, renewables  made up an estimated 60% of net additions to the global  power capacity. In several countries renewables represented  a higher share of added capacity (REN21-2015).3 The  increase in market volume and strong global competition led  to significant cost reductions, especially for solar Pv and  wind power. As a result, other renewable energy technologies  were under pressure to lower costs, particularly in the heating  and cooling sector due to the increased competitiveness of  electricity-based heating systems. Cost competitive solar Pv  in combination with electrical heat pumps became  economically viable, negatively impacting the solar thermal  collector market.  While developments in the renewable energy, heating and  cooling sector were slower than in the power sector, the  markets for solar thermal collectors and geothermal heat  pumps grew by 9%. bio-heat production remained stable in  2014, increasing only 1% from 2013 levels. The lack of  infrastructure for heating systems and an uncertain policy  environment impeded the development of the renewable  energy renewable energy heating market (REN21-2015).  The number of electric vehicles worldwide doubled year over  year to 665,000. E-mobility and recent developments in  battery storage (including significant cost reductions) are  likely to change the future role of renewable energy in the  transport sector. biofuels, however, are still the main  renewable fuel source used in the transport sector and grew  8.4% in 2014 compared the previous year (REN21-2015).  In conclusion, developments in the heating/cooling sector and  the transport sector in particular are far too slow. Despite all  the success in the renewable power sector, the extreme  growth of coal power generation, especially in China,  undercuts many successes with renewables. However, the first  sign of a stagnation of coal demand in China – even a small  decline for the first time in 2014 – provides reason to hope. The  political framework of energy markets must adapt to the new  emerging, mostly distributed energy technologies in order to  support the transition to 100% renewable energy supply.  Thus, Energy [R]evolution has begun, especially in the power  sector, but heating and transport significantly lag behind.  Overall, the transition from fossil and nuclear fuels to  renewables is too slow, and energy demand is still growing  too quickly.  36    3  37  3.2 setting up an energy [r]evolution scenario  This section explains the basic principles and strategic  approach of the development of the Energy [R]evolution  concepts, which have served as a basis for the scenario  modelling since the very first Energy [R]evolution scenario  published in 2005. The Energy [R]evolution scenario series  follows a “seven-step logic,” which stretches from the  evaluation of natural resource limits to key drivers for energy  demand and energy efficiency potentials, an analysis of  available technologies and their market development  potential, and specific policy measures required to implement  a theoretical concept on real markets. This concept, however,  has been constantly improved as technologies develop and  new technical and economical possibilities emerge.  the seven steps are:  1. define natural limits for the climate and fuel resources.  2. define renewable energy resource limits.  3. identify drivers for demand.  4. define efficiency potentials by sector.  5. establish time lines for implementation.  6. identify required infrastructure.  7. identify required policies.  One of the major changes we have made in the Energy  [R]evolution concept over the past years is to give solar  photovoltaics a significantly increasing role in the energy  sector and electric mobility a more important role due to  better battery technology. both solar Pv and storage  technologies are potentially disruptive; they could turn the  energy sector on its head a relatively quickly.  3.3 the energy [r]evolution logic  1. define natural limits:  the phase-out cascade for fossil fuels: Geological resources of  coal could provide several hundred years of fuel, but we cannot  burn them and keep within safe climate change limits. Thus,  lignite – as the most carbon intensive coal – must be phased-out  first, followed by hard coal. The use of oil will be phased-out in  the pace of production depletion of existing oil wells (see  chapter 5), and no new deep sea and Arctic / Antarctic oil wells  will be opened.  Gas production follows the same logic as oil and will be phased  out as the last fossil fuel.  reduce energy-related carbon dioxide to zero by mid-century:  There is only so much carbon that the atmosphere can absorb.  Each year we emit almost 30 billion tonnes of carbon  equivalents. The Energy [R]evolution scenario has a target to  phase-out energy-related CO2 emissions by 2050. In addition,  the regional transition towards carbon-free energy supply aims  to achieve energy equity – shifting towards a fairer worldwide  distribution of efficiently-used supply – as soon as technically  possible. by 2040, the average per capita emission should be  between 0.5 and 1 tonne of CO2.  2. define renewable energy resource limits:  renewable energy resource – mapping the future energy mix:  The 5 renewable energy resources (solar, wind, hydro, geothermal  and ocean) are available in different quantities – both by region  and by season. Specific renewable energy potential maps are  available from a number of scientific research institutions for each  country around the world. The German Aerospace Centre takes  part in the global mapping project of the International Renewable  Energy Agency (IRENA), which provides detailed data for all  renewable energy resources (IRENA-Global Atlas 2015).4 The  various regional renewable energy resources influence the  projected energy mix in Energy [R]evolution scenarios.  bioenergy – an important resource with limited sustainable  potential: bioenergy is needed for fossil fuel replacement where no  other technical alternative is available. Energy [R]evolution  scenarios use bioenergy especially for industrial process heat,  aviation, shipping and heavy machinery. Greenpeace identified the  sustainable bioenergy potential globally in a scientific survey in 2008  at around 80 to maximum 100 Ej per year (Dbfz 2008).5 The  overall sustainable bioenergy potential is, however, subject to  change due to technical and scientific development and / or change  of usage. An increased use of biomass for plastics, for example,  would reduce the resources available for energy conversion.    3. identify drivers for demand:  equity and fair access to energy for all: The global and regional  population development pathways are taken from united Nations  projections (uN 2014).6 Greenpeace does neither undertake any  of its own population projections, nor is family planning part of  the Energy [R]evolution energy scenario efficiency concept.  However, a focus for future energy demand projections lies on a  fair distribution of benefits and costs within societies, between  nations, and between present and future generations. At one  extreme, a third of the world’s population has no access to  electricity, whilst the most industrialised countries consume  much more than their fair share. The Energy [R]evolution  concept aims to supply energy for an equal living standard for  every person by 2050 if required economic development is  believed to take place. (for further information, see chapter 5.)  decouple growth from fossil fuel use: The projections for  economic growth are based on the International Energy  Agencies (IEA) World Energy Outlook projections (for further  information, see chapter 5). Starting in the developed countries,  economic growth must be fully decoupled from fossil fuel usage.  It is a fallacy to suggest that economic growth must be  predicated on increased fossil fuel combustion.  4. define efficiency potentials by sector:  energy not used is the cheapest; smart use of energy needed:  Electrical appliances, industrial process, heating and cooling of  buildings, and all forms of transport technologies still have  significant efficiency potential. The latest available technologies  in all sectors are implemented within the range of normal  replacement rates. Energy [R]evolution scenarios focus on  efficiency rather than sufficiency in the power and  heating/cooling sector. The transport sector requires sufficiency  especially in regard to usage of individual cars and aviation. A  modular shift from road to rail and from air to rail where ever  possible as an example of sufficiency.  5. establish time lines for implementation:  there is no renewable energy shortage as such: The sun sends  more energy to the earth surface per day than we consume each  year. However, renewable energy technologies need to be  engineered, installed, and operated, which requires skilled  labour, financial resources and adapted energy policies. The  transition from a fossil to a largely renewable energy supply  system will take time. Energy [R]evolution scenarios take past  experiences into account in determining how fast renewable  energy technologies can scale up. In particular, the experience  of Denmark, Germany and China during the last decade showed  that a certain time is needed to train workers and set up required  industries and infrastructure. An overheated renewable industry  with low-quality products does more damage than good to a  long-term transition. Thus, Energy [R]evolution scenarios are  ambitious but not unrealistic. The first decade of our RE  development pathways are based on industries projections such  as from the Global Wind Energy Council (GWEC 2015)7 and Solar  Power Europe (SPE 2015).8  6. identify required infrastructure:  smart grids are key, as is solar and wind power integration:  Increased shares of distributed solar photovoltaic and onshore  wind in distribution and medium voltage grids and offshore wind  and concentrated solar power generation connected to  transmission grids require the development of infrastructure,  both for the physical setup and for management (brown et. al.  2014).9 Also, the distribution of generation capacities across  different voltage levels has a significant influence on required  grid expansion and/or dispatch capacities (Teske 2015).10  Existing gas pipelines and storage facilities might be available for  the transport and storage of renewable hydrogen and/or  methane. Existing gas power plants can therefore be used as  dispatch plants to avoid stranded investments.  storage – the next big thing: The development of electric  vehicles has triggered more research in storage technologies,  especially batteries. Increased shares of wind and solar caused  another wave of research and market development for storage  technologies, such as hydrogen, renewable methane and  pumped hydro power plants. Storage technologies have thus  improved significantly. Energy [R]evolution scenarios, however,  aim to minimize storage needs for the next decade as costs are  expected to remain high for that time frame. In the medium to  long term, storage technologies are needed especially to replace  fossil fuels with electricity in the transport sector.  7. identify required policies:  new energy markets need new energy policies: Climate and  energy policy need to go hand in hand. The uNfCCC process  (see chapter 1) is key to protect the global climate, just as  national energy policies are key to implement the required  emission reduction with renewables and energy efficiency. The  Energy [R]evolution scenarios are based on the experience  documented in policy analysis, such as from REN 21 (REN21),11  IRENA (IRENA 2015)12 and the IEA (IEA 2015 A). Specific policy  recommendations are documented in chapter 2 of this report.  38    3  39  3.4 the “5 step implementation”  In 2013, renewable energy sources accounted for 19% of the  world’s final energy demand. Modern renewables, such as  solar, wind and geothermal energy, accounted for 10%, while  traditional biomass contributed 9%. The latter often causes  environmental damage and thus need to be replaced with new  renewables as well. The share of renewable energy in electricity  generation was 22.8% in 2013, a 5% increase over the past 4  years. About 78% of primary energy supply today still comes  from fossil fuels13 - a decrease of 3 % over the past 4 years.  Now is the time to make substantial structural changes in the  energy and power sector within the next decade. Many power  plants in industrialised countries, such as the uSA, japan  and the European union, are nearing retirement; more than  half of all operating power plants are over 20 years old. At the  same time developing countries, such as China, India, South  Africa and brazil, are looking to satisfy the growing energy  demand created by their expanding economies.  Worldwide, there is good news: Pv and wind are growing  strongly. In 2015, roughly 50 GW of solar is expected to be  installed, up from 30 GW annually at the beginning of this  decade. This year, the global Pv market also crossed the 200  GW threshold. by the end of the decade, nearly half that much  could be installed annually. Likewise, after years of roughly 30-  40 GW of annual additions, the wind market grew in 2014 by  over 50 GW and will cross the 400 GW threshold this year.  This market as well could grow to around 90 GW annually by  the end of this decade. because the capacity factors of wind  turbines are generally double that of Pv, twice as much wind  power would be generated from these additions.  Within this decade, the power sector will decide how new  electricity demand will be met, either by fossil and nuclear  fuels or by the efficient use of renewable energy. The Energy  [R]evolution scenario puts forwards a policy and technical  model for renewable energy and cogeneration combined with  energy efficiency to meet the world’s needs.  Renewable energy and cogeneration – both as central-station  power plants and distributed units – have to grow faster than  overall global energy demand. both approaches must replace  old generating technologies and deliver the additional energy  required in the developing world.  A transitional phase is required to build up the necessary  infrastructure because it is not possible to switch directly from  a large-scale fossil and nuclear energy system to a fully  renewable energy supply. Whilst remaining firmly committed to  the promotion of renewable sources of energy, we appreciate  that conventional natural gas, used in appropriately scaled  cogeneration plants, is valuable as a transition fuel, and can  also drive cost-effective decentralisation of the energy  infrastructure. With warmer summers, tri-generation – which  incorporates heat-fired absorption chillers to deliver cooling  capacity in addition to heat and power – will become a  valuable means of achieving emissions reductions. The Energy  [R]evolution envisages a development pathway away from the  present energy supply structure and towards a sustainable  system. There are three main stages to this.    step 1: energy efficiency and equity  The Energy [R]evolution requires an ambitious exploitation of  energy efficiency. The focus is on current best practices and  products, along with probable future technologies, assuming  continuous innovation. The energy savings are fairly equally  distributed over the three sectors – industry, transport and  domestic/business. Intelligent use, not abstinence, is the  basic philosophy.  The most important energy saving options are improved heat  insulation and building design, super-efficient electrical  machines and drives, replacement of old style electrical  heating systems by renewable heat production (such as solar  collectors) and a reduction in energy consumption by vehicles  used for goods and passenger traffic.  by the end of this decade, new buildings in Europe will have  to be “nearly zero-carbon,” which is an excellent step  forwards, though it comes a bit late – Passive House  architecture was proven two decades ago. This energyefficient  architecture can be used worldwide in almost all  climates, both to reduce heating demand (such as in  southern Canadian cities) as well as cooling demand (from  Las vegas to Dubai). However, the greatest gains are to be  made not in new buildings, but in renovations. Here,  governments must speed up the renovation rate of existing  building stock, and all renovations must be ambitious in light  of long building service lives. Moreover, the comfort gains  from such architecture make these buildings a pleasure to live  and work in; here, intelligent energy use is clearly about  better living, not abstinence.  Industrialised countries currently use energy most  inefficiently. They can reduce their consumption drastically  without losing either housing comfort or gadgets. The Energy  [R]evolution scenario depends on OECD countries to save  energy as developing countries increase theirs. The ultimate  goal is stable global energy consumption within the next two  decades. Another aim is to ‘energy equity’.  A dramatic reduction in primary energy demand compared to  the Reference scenario – but with the same GDP and  population development - is a crucial prerequisite for  achieving a significant share of renewable energy sources in  the overall energy supply, compensating for the phasing out  of nuclear energy and reduction in fossil fuel consumption.  step 2: the renewable energy revolution  decentralised energy and large scale renewables  Decentralised energy is connected to a local distribution  network system, to which homes, offices, and small businesses  are generally connected. Energy [R]evolution scenarios make  extensive use of Distributed Energy (DE): energy generated at  or near the point of use. We define distributed power generation  as applications connected to low-and medium-voltage power  lines with an average transport distance from several hundred  meters up to around 100 kilometres. Several different  distributed power plant technologies are available: solar  photovoltaics, onshore wind turbines, run-of-river hydro power  plants, bioenergy and geothermal power plants, and potentially  near-shore ocean energy plants.  40    3  41  The dominant renewable electricity source is now wind power,  but photovoltaics will catch up in the future. Significant cost  reduction of solar photovoltaic roof-top systems is leading to  “grid parity” in almost all industrialized countries. Households  and small businesses can then produce their own solar power  for the same or a lower cost than rates for grid electricity; onsite  power generation - a term usually used for industry - now  makes economic sense for the private sector.  Distributed energy also includes stand-alone systems for  heating / cooling either connected to district heating networks  or for a single building supply, such as solar thermal collectors,  bio energy heat systems and (geothermal) heat pumps. A  hybrid between renewables and energy efficiency, heat pumps  convert one unit of electricity into up to 4 units of heat.  All these decentralized technologies can be commercialised  for domestic users to provide sustainable, low-carbon  energy. Increased shares of distributed generation  technologies require adapted energy policies for “prosumers”  – consumers who produce own energy.  This option opens up a whole new market for solar  photovoltaics and turns the business model for utilities on its  head (see new business models). Those who were once  captive utility customers will become utility competitors.  Energy [R]evolution scenarios assume that private consumer  and small and medium enterprises (SME) will meet most of  their electricity needs with solar photovoltaic and storage if  space to set up the system is accessible. Therefore, utilities  will lose most of their customers connected to the distribution  grid until 2030 for electricity sales from centralized power  plants. Therefore, utilities will have to move from selling  energy to selling energy services by managing the operation  and dispatch of decentralized generation capacity.  Industry and business can use cogeneration power plants and  co-generation batteries for on-site power generation to cover  their own power needs. Surplus power will be sold to the grid,  while excess heat can to be piped to nearby buildings, a system  known as combined heat and power. for a fuel like (bio-) gas,  almost all the input energy is used, not just a fraction as with  traditional central-station fossil fuel electricity plants.  While a large proportion of global energy in 2050 will be produced  by decentralised energy sources, large-scale renewable energy  will still be needed for an energy revolution. Large offshore wind  farms and concentrating solar power (CSP) plants in the Sunbelt  regions of the world will therefore have an important but broader  role to play. Offshore wind turbines produce electricity more hours  of the day, thereby reducing the need for backup generators, and  CSP with storage is dispatchable. Centralized renewable energy  will also be needed to provide process heat for industry and  desalination (in the case of CSP), to supply increase power  demand for the heating and transport sector, and to produce  synthetic fuels for the transport sector.    step 3: the transport revolution  moving around with different technologies and less energy  Switching to 100% renewables is most challenging in the  transport sector. Today 92% of the transport energy comes  from oil and only 1% from electricity (IEA 2015 b).14 A simple  “fuel switch” from oil to bio energy and electricity is neither  technically possible nor sustainable. While there is an urgent  need to expand electric mobility – public and individual  transport technologies such as trains, busses, cars, and  trucks – we also need to re-think our current mobility concept  as such. The design of (mega-) cities has a huge influence  whether people have to commute long distances or if they  can walk or bike to work (WfC 2014).15 On the other hand,  increasing urban populations offer an opportunity to increase  the usage of environmentally friendly mass transit systems.  The transport of freight needs to move from road to rail and –  if possible – from aviation to ships, which requires better  logistics and new, more efficiency transport technologies (see  chapter 12).  Cars evolve in Energy [R]evolution scenarios. All potentials to  make cars lighter and the combustion engine more efficient  are exploited first. by around 2025, the car market moves via  hybrid drives towards fully electric drives. The e-vehicle  market is still nascent in 2015, and technical uncertainties  remain, especially in regard to the storage technologies. We  therefore do not expect a real turnaround with significant oil  reduction effect before 2025. However the technical evolution  must start now in order to be ready by then.  The use of biofuels is limited by the availability of sustainably  grown biomass. It will primarily be committed to heavy  machinery, aviation and shipping, where electricity does not  seem to be an option for the next few decades. Outside the  transport sector, biomass is needed for specific industries to  supply process heat and carbon – not to mention as a raw  material outside the energy sector. unlike previous Energy  [R]evolution scenarios, this one no longer includes biofuels  for private cars.16 Electric vehicles will therefore play an even  more important role in improving energy efficiency in  transport and substituting for fossil fuels after 2025.  Overall, achieving an economically attractive growth of  renewable energy sources requires a balanced and timely  mobilisation of all technologies. Such a mobilisation depends  on resource availability, cost reduction potential and  technological maturity. And alongside technology driven  solutions, lifestyle changes - like simply driving less and using  more public transport – have a huge potential to reduce  greenhouse gas emissions. fortunately, these new behaviour  patterns will be perceived as improvements, not  compromises; young people around the world already  increasingly prefer to spend time on their smart phones and  buses and trains rather than drive.  42    3  43  step 4: smart infrastructure to secure renewables 24/7  because renewable energy relies mostly on natural  resources, which are not available at all times, some critics  say this makes it unsuitable for large portions of energy  demand. yet, Denmark got around 40 percent of its electricity  from wind power alone in 2014; Spain and Portugal, around  a quarter. A complete transformation of the energy system  will be necessary to accommodate the significantly higher  shares of renewable energy expected under the Energy  [R]evolution scenario. The grid network of cables and substations  that brings electricity to our homes and factories was  designed for large, centralised generators running at huge  loads, providing ‘base load’ power. until now, renewable  energy has been seen as an additional slice of the energy mix  and had had to adapt to the grid’s operating conditions. If the  Energy Revolution scenario is to be realised, this situation will  have to change.  Renewable energy supply 24/7 is technically and  economically possible; it just needs the right policy and the  commercial investment to get things moving and ‘keep the  lights on’ (GP-EN 2014).17 The task of integrating renewable  energy technologies into existing power systems is similar in  all power systems around the world, whether they are large,  centralized systems or island systems.  Thorough planning is needed to ensure that the available  production can match demand at all times. In addition to  balancing supply and demand, the power system must also  be able to:  • fulfil defined power quality standards – voltage/frequency –  which may require additional technical equipment in the power  system and support from different ancillary services (see  appendix 1 for definitions of terms); and  • survive extreme situations such as sudden interruptions of  supply (such as a fault at a generation unit) or interruption of the  transmission system.  base load and system balancing  Power balance aims at keeping frequency in the system  consistent. The mains frequency describes the frequency at  which AC electricity is delivered from the generator to the end  user, and it is measured in hertz (Hz). frequency varies in a  system as the load (demand) changes. In a power grid  operating close to its peak capacity, there can be rapid  fluctuations in frequency, and dramatic fluctuations can occur  just before a major power outage. Typically, power systems  were designed around large power stations providing baseload  capacity operating almost constantly at full output. These  centralized units, typically nuclear or coal power plants, are  inflexible generation resources – they don’t “follow load” –  change their output to match changing demand – as well as  flexible gas turbines and hydropower units, for instance.  Power systems with large amounts of inflexible generation  resources, such as nuclear power stations, also require a  significant amount of flexible generation resources.  priority dispatch for renewables ends “base-generation”  Renewable energy integrated into a smart grid changes the  need for base load power. An energy switch based on  renewables redefines the need for “base load” power  generation. Instead, traditional base load power plants such as  coal are replaced by a mix of flexible energy providers that can  follow the load during the day and night (such as solar plus  gas, geothermal, wind and demand management), without  blackouts. The base load is therefore provided by a cascade of  flexible power plants – instead of just baseload generation.  Current suPPly system:  • LOW SHARES Of fLuCTuATING RENEWAbLE ENERGy  • THE ‘bASE LOAD’ POWER IS A SOLID bAR AT THE bOTTOM Of THE GRAPH.  • RENEWAbLE ENERGy fORMS A ‘vARIAbLE’ LAyER bECAuSE SuN AND WIND LEvELS  CHANGES THROuGHOuT THE DAy.  • GAS AND HyDRO POWER CAN bE SWITCHED ON AND Off IN RESPONSE TO DEMAND.  THIS COMbINATION IS SuSTAINAbLE uSING WEATHER fORECASTING AND CLEvER GRID  MANAGEMENT.  • WITH THIS ARRANGEMENT THERE IS ROOM fOR AbOuT 25 PERCENT vARIAbLE  RENEWAbLE ENERGy.  to combat climate change much more than 25 percent renewable  electricity is needed.    suPPly system with more than 25 PerCent fluCtuating  renewable energy > base load Priority:  • THIS APPROACH ADDS RENEWAbLE ENERGy buT GIvES PRIORITy TO bASE LOAD  • AS RENEWAbLE ENERGy SuPPLIES GROW THEy WILL ExCEED THE DEMAND AT SOME  TIMES Of THE DAy, CREATING SuRPLuS POWER.  • TO A POINT, THIS CAN bE OvERCOME by STORING POWER, MOvING POWER bETWEEN  AREAS, SHIfTING DEMAND DuRING THE DAy OR SHuTTING DOWN THE RENEWAbLE  GENERATORS AT PEAk TIMES.  this approach does not work when renewables exceed 50 percent of the  mix, and cannot provide renewable energy as 90- 100% of the mix.  source DR. SvEN TESkE / GREENPEACE - 2015.  figure 3.5 | the evolving approach to grids. continued.  suPPly system with more than 25 PerCent fluCtuating  renewable energy – renewable energy Priority  • THIS APPROACH ADDS RENEWAbLES buT GIvES PRIORITy TO CLEAN ENERGy.  • If RENEWAbLE ENERGy IS GIvEN PRIORITy TO THE GRID, IT “CuTS INTO” THE bASE  LOAD POWER.  • THEORETICALLy, NuCLEAR AND COAL NEED TO RuN AT REDuCED CAPACITy OR bE  ENTIRELy TuRNED Off IN PEAk SuPPLy TIMES (vERy SuNNy OR WINDy).  • THERE ARE TECHNICAL AND SAfETy LIMITATIONS TO THE SPEED, SCALE AND  fREQuENCy Of CHANGES IN POWER OuTPuT fOR NuCLEAR AND CCS COAL PLANTS.  technically difficult, not a solution.  the solution: an oPtimised system with over 90% renewable  energy suPPly  • A fuLLy OPTIMISED GRID, WHERE 100 PERCENT RENEWAbLES OPERATE WITH  STORAGE, TRANSMISSION Of ELECTRICITy TO OTHER REGIONS, DEMAND  MANAGEMENT AND CuRTAILMENT ONLy WHEN REQuIRED.  • DEMAND MANAGEMENT EffECTIvELy MOvES THE HIGHEST PEAk AND ‘fLATTENS OuT’  THE CuRvE Of ELECTRICITy uSE OvER A DAy.  works!    the smart-grid vision for the energy [r]evolution  Developing a power system based almost entirely on  renewable energy sources will require a new overall power  system architecture – including Smart-Grid Technology, which  will need substantial amounts of work to emerge (ECOGRID).18  figure 3.6 shows a very basic graphic representation of the key  elements of future, renewable-based power systems using  Smart Grid technology (GP-EN 2009).19  step 5: new policies to enable new business models  The Energy Revolution scenario will also result in a dramatic  change in the business model of energy companies, utilities,  fuel suppliers and manufacturers of energy technologies.  Decentralised energy generation for self-supply along with  utility-scale solar, onshore and offshore wind farms in remote  areas will have a profound impact on the way utilities operate  by 2020. for instance, these energy sources require no fuel,  which will challenge vertically integrated utilities.    The current model is a relatively small number of large power  plants owned and operated by utilities or their subsidiaries,  generating electricity for the population. under the Energy  Revolution scenario, around 60 to 70% of electricity will be  made by small but numerous distributed power plants.  Ownership will shift away from centralised utilities towards  more private investors, manufacturers of renewable energy  technologies and EPC companies (engineering, procurement  and construction). In turn, the value chain for power  companies will shift towards project development, equipment  manufacturing and operation and maintenance (figure 4).  Simply selling electricity to customers will play a smaller role;  power companies of the future will deliver a total power plant  and the required IT services to customers, not just electricity.  They will therefore move towards becoming service providers  for customers. The majority of power plants will also not  require any fuel supply, so fuel production companies will lose  their strategic importance.  Today’s power supply value chain is broken down into clearly  defined players, but a global renewable power supply will  inevitably change this division of roles and responsibilities.  The following table provides an overview of how the value  chain would change in a revolutionised energy mix.  The future pattern under the Energy [R]evolution will see more  and more renewable energy companies, such as wind turbine  manufacturers becoming involved in project development,  installation, and operation and maintenance, whilst utilities  will lose their status. Traditional energy supply companies  that do not move towards renewable project development will  either lose market share or drop out of the market completely.  policy defines ownership and investment flows  In order to organize the transition towards a 100% renewable  energy market, specific policies are required to provide  planning and investment security for small and medium-size  enterprises (SME). Those policies must first and foremost  secure access to infrastructure – power lines, gas pipelines  and district heating systems – so that electricity, hydrogen,  renewable methane and/or renewable heat can be  transported to customers. Priority dispatch in all networks is  key for project developers and investors as well because the  projected amount of renewable energy produced each year is  a fundamental cornerstone for financial planning.    Grid operation will move  towards state controlled  grid companies or  communities due to  liberalisation.  A few large multinational  oil, gas and coal mining  companies dominate:  today approx 75-80%  of power plants need  fuel supply.  Relatively view power plants owned and  sometimes operated by utilities.  Coal, gas and nuclear power stations are larger than renewables. Average  number of power plants needed per 1 GW installed only 1 or 2 projects.    Grid operation will move  towards state controlled  grid companies or  communities due to  liberalisation.  by 2050 almost all power  generation technologies -  accept biomass - will  operate without the need  of fuel supply.  Many projects will be owned by private households  or investment banks in the case of larger projects.  Renewable power plants are small in capacity, the amount of projects  for project development, manufacturers and installation companies per  installed 1 GW is bigger by an order of magnitude. In the case of Pv  it could be up to 500 projects, for onshore wind still 25 to 50 projects.  source DR. SvEN TESkE / GREENPEACE.  47  future customer groups  The capacity demand of power and/or heat for different  customer groups defines the voltage level they are connected  to and whether they are connected to the distribution or  transmission level of gas pipelines. The interface between  customer and infrastructure opens a variety of technology  and hence business options for energy service companies.  for households with access to a roof space, for example, the  installation of solar photovoltaics is now very often a least-cost  option. The cost of photovoltaic electricity has  decreased dramatically over the past few years. Parity with  retail electricity and oil-based fuels has been reached in many  countries and market segments and wholesale parity is  approaching in some markets (beyer 2015).20  figure 3.8 provides a rough overview of technology options  for different customers groups with regard to their  infrastructural needs.  This section only covers a small share of business model  possibilities for utilities. However, it seems relatively clear that  not changing the current conventional business model is not  an option for utilities either.  German utilities are a good example of future challenges. In  2014, RWE – one of Germany’s two biggest utilities along  with Eon – posted a 45 percent drop in profits. Power prices  are down, and the share of conventional electricity is also  falling, so these firms sell less power at lower prices. At RWE,  power sales fell by 7.5 percent in 2014 year over year, for  instance. The result was 29 percent lower operating the  profits from conventional power generation. The outlook is  also dismal, with year-ahead prices dropping to the lowest  level in a decade.  RWE has responded partly by forming a partnership with EPC  (Conergy) for significant investments in rooftop solar in  Germany. Likewise, Eon is breaking up into two companies:  one doing business with conventional energy, and the other  with renewables and energy services. This plan is clear  evidence that top utility experts understand the incompatibility  of conventional energy with renewables. (Pv-M 3-2015).21    f i n a n c i n g t h e e n e r gy [ r ] e v o lu t i o n  image rio MaMoré, brazil, 2014. the river flows toward the north (left in these iMages) and receives a large aMount of sediMent at the confluence with the rio grande. the extra  sediMent enhances the growth of Point bars—the lighter-colored, vegetation-free areas along the inside bends of the riverbank. natural habitats that exist within floodPlains dePend  on river Migration to both renew habitat and Maintain the natural functioning of existing habitat.    4.1 renewable energy project planning basics  The renewable energy market works significantly different  than coal, gas and nuclear power markets. The table below  provides an overview of the ten steps from “field to an  operating power plant” for renewable energy projects in the  current market situation. Those steps are similar same for  each renewable energy technology; however, steps 3 and 4  are especially important for wind and solar projects. In  developing countries, the government and mostly state-owned  utilities might directly or indirectly act as project  developers. The project developer might also be work as a  subdivision of a state owned utility.    P ProJect develoPer. m Meteorological exPerts. i investor. u utility.  table 4.1 | how does the current renewable energy market work in practice?  STEP WHAT WILL BE DONE? WHO? NEEDED INFORMATION / POLICY  AND/OR INVESTMENT FRAMEWORK  step 1:  SITE IDENTIfICATION  identify the best locations for generators (e.g. wind turbines)  and pay special attention to technical and commercial data,  conservation issues and any concerns that local  communities may have.  P resource analysis to identify possible sites  Policy stability in order to make sure that the policy  is still in place once step 10 has been reached.  without a certainty that the renewable electricity  produced can be fed entirely into the grid to a  reliable tariff, the entire process will not start.  step 2:  SECuRING LAND uNDER CIvIL LAW  secure suitable locations through purchase and lease  agreements with land owners.  P transparent planning, efficient authorisation  and permitting.  step 3:  DETERMINING SITE  SPECIfIC POTENTIAL  site specific resource analysis (e.g. wind measurement on  hub height) from independent experts. this will not be done  by the project developer as (wind) data from independent  experts is a requirement for risk assessments by investors.  P + M see above.  step 4:  TECHNICAL PLANNING/  MICROSITING  specialists develop the optimum configuration or sites for the  technology, taking a wide range of parameters into  consideration in order to achieve the best performance.  P see above.  step 5:  PERMIT PROCESS  organise all necessary surveys, put together the required  documentation and follow the whole permit process.  P transparent planning, efficient authorisation  and permitting.  step 6:  GRID CONNECTION PLANNING  electrical engineers work with grid operators to develop the  optimum grid connection concept.  P + u Priority access to the grid.  certainty that the entire amount of electricity  produced can be feed into the grid.  step 7:  fINANCING  once the entire project design is ready and the estimated  annual output (in kwh/a) has been calculated, all permits are  processed and the total finance concept (incl. total  investment and profit estimation) has been developed, the  project developer will contact financial institutions to either  apply for a loan and/or sell the entire project.  P + i long term power purchase contract.  Prior and mandatory access to the grid.  site specific analysis (possible annual output).  step 8:  CONSTRuCTION  civil engineers organise the entire construction phase. this  can be done by the project developer or another.  ePc (engineering, procurement & construction) company –  with the financial support from the investor.  P + i signed contracts with grid operator.  signed contract with investors.  step 9:  START Of OPERATION  electrical engineers make sure that the power plant will be  connected to the power grid.  P + u Prior access to the grid (to avoid curtailment).  step 10:  buSINESS AND OPERATIONS  MANAGEMENT  optimum technical and commercial operation of power  plants/farms throughout their entire operating life – for the  owner (e.g. a bank).  P + u + i good technology & knowledge (a cost-saving  approach and “copy + paste engineering” will be  more expensive in the long-term).  source SWISS RE 2011.  4.2 the impacts of climate change  The Swiss RE Private Equity Partners have provided an  introduction to renewable energy infrastructure investing  (Swiss RE – 2011)1 describing what makes renewable energy  projects different from fossil-fuel based energy assets from a  finance perspective:  • Renewable energy projects have short construction period  compared to conventional energy generation and other  infrastructure assets. Renewable projects have limited  ramp-up periods, and construction periods of one to three  years, compared to 10 years to build while large  conventional power plants.  • In several countries, renewable energy producers have  been granted priority dispatch. Where in place, grid  operators are usually obliged to connect renewable power  plants to their grid, and retailers or other authorised entities  must purchase all renewable electricity produced.  • Renewable projects present relatively low operational  complexity compared to other energy generation assets  and other infrastructure asset classes. Onshore wind and  solar Pv projects in particular have well established  operational track records. This is obviously less the case  for biomass and offshore wind plants.  • Renewable projects typically have non-recourse financing,  through a mix of debt and equity. In contrast to traditional  corporate lending, project finance relies on future cash flows  for interest and debt repayment, rather than the asset value  or the historical financial performance of a company. Project  finance debt typically covers 70–90% of the cost of a project,  is non-recourse to the investors, and ideally matches the  duration of the underlying contractual agreements.  • Renewable power typically has predictable cash flows and is  not subject to fuel price volatility because the primary energy  resource is generally free (except for biomass). Contractually  guaranteed tariffs along with the moderate cost of building,  operating and maintaining renewable generation facilities  allow for secure profit margins and predictable cash flows.  • Renewable electricity remuneration mechanisms often  include some kind of inflation indexation, although incentive  schemes may vary on a case-by-case basis. for example,  several tariffs in the Eu are indexed to consumer price  indices and adjusted on an annual basis (such as in Spain  and Italy). In projects where specific inflation protection is  not provided (such as in Germany), the regulatory  framework allows selling power on the spot market, should  the power price be higher than the guaranteed tariff.  • Renewable power plants have expected long useful lives  (over 20 years). Transmission lines usually have economic  lives of over 40 years. Renewable assets are typically  underpinned by long-term contracts with utilities and benefit  from governmental support and manufacturer warranties.  • Renewable energy projects deliver attractive and stable  sources of income, only loosely linked to the economic  cycle. Project owners do not have to manage fuel cost  volatility, and projects generate high operating margins with  relatively secure revenues and generally limited market risk.    • The widespread development of renewable power  generation will require significant investments in the  electricity grid. future grid (smart grids) will have to  integrate an ever-increasing, decentralised, fluctuating  supply of renewable energy. furthermore, suppliers and/or  distribution companies will be expected to deliver a  sophisticated range of services by embedding digital grid  devices into power networks.  Risk assessment and allocation is at the centre of project  finance. Accordingly, project structuring and expected return  are directly related to the risk profile of the project. The four  main risk factors to consider when investing in renewable  energy assets are:  • Regulatory risks refer to adverse changes in laws and  regulations, unfavourable tariff setting and changes in and  breaches of contracts. However policy security is crucial for  all forms of energies and a long-term energy policy stability  is the basic fundament for all investments. However, a  diversified investment across regulatory jurisdictions,  geographies, and technologies can help mitigate those risks.  • Construction risks relate to the delayed or costly delivery of  an asset, the default of a contracting party, or an  engineering/design failure. Construction risks are less  prevalent for renewable energy projects because they have  relatively simple designs; however, construction risks can  be further mitigated by selecting high-quality and  experienced turnkey partners, using proven technologies  and established equipment suppliers, and agreeing on  retentions and construction guarantees  • Financing risks refer to the inadequate use of debt in the  financial structure of an asset. Examples include the  abusive use of leverage, exposure to interest rate volatility,  and the need to refinance at less favourable terms.  • Operational risks include equipment failure, counterparty  default, and reduced availability of the primary energy  source (such as wind, heat, and insolation). for renewable  assets, lower than forecast resource availability will result in  lower revenues and profitability, so this risk can  detrimentally impact the business case.    4.3 overcoming barriers to finance and  investment for renewable energy  Despite the relatively strong growth in renewable energies in  an increase number of countries, many barriers still hinder the  rapid uptake of renewable energy needed to achieve the  scale of development required. The key barriers to renewable  energy investment identified by Greenpeace in a literature  review2 and interviews with renewable energy sector  financiers and developers are shown in figure 4.4.  52    broad categories of common barriers to renewable energy  development are present in many countries; however, the  nature of the barriers differs significantly. At the local level,  political and policy support, grid infrastructure, electricity  markets and planning regulations have to be negotiated for  new projects.  In some regions, policy uncertainty holds back investment  more than any absence of policy support mechanisms. In the  short term, investors aren’t confident rules will remain  unaltered or that renewable energy goals will be met in the  longer term, let alone increased.  Investor caution about these risks drives up investment costs,  and the difficulty in accessing finance is a barrier for renewable  energy project developers. The contributing factors include a  lack of information and experience among investors and  project developers, involvement of smaller companies and  projects, and a high proportion of up-front costs.  Grid access and grid infrastructure is also a major barrier for  developers who, during project development, are not certain  they will be able to sell all the electricity they generate in  many countries.  In many regions, both state-owned and private utilities block  renewable energy with their market and political power,  specifically by maintaining the ‘status quo’ in the grid,  protecting electricity markets for centralised coal and nuclear  power, and lobbying against pro-renewable and climate  protection laws.  The sometimes higher cost of renewable relative to  competitors is still a barrier, though many are confident that it  will be overcome in the coming decades. The Special Report  on Renewable Energy Sources and Climate Change  Mitigation (SRREN) identifies cost as the most significant  barrier to investment;3 renewable energy will rely on policy  intervention by governments in order to be competitive for  some time, which creates additional risks for investors. It is  important to note though that in some regions of the world  specific renewable technologies are broadly competitive with  current market energy prices (such as onshore wind in  Europe and solar hot water heaters in China).  Concerns over planning and permit issues are significant,  though they vary significantly in their strength and nature  depending on the jurisdiction.    4.4 how to overcome investment barriers for  renewable energy  The Energy [R]evolution will require a mix of policy measures,  finance, grid, and development. These are dealt with  throughout this report, the policy measures in particular in  Chapter 13. In summary:  • Additional and improved policy support mechanisms for  renewable energy are needed in all countries and regions.  • building confidence in the existing policy mechanisms may  be just as important as making them stronger, particularly  in the short term.  • Improved policy mechanisms can also lower the cost of  finance, particularly by providing longer durations of  revenue support and increasing revenue certainty.4  • Access to finance can be increased by greater involvement  of governments and development banks in programs like  loan guarantees and green bonds as well as more active  private investors.  • Grid access and infrastructure needs to be improved  through investment in smart, decentralised grids.  • Lowering the cost of renewable energy technologies  directly will require industry development and boosted  research and development.  • A smoother pathway for renewable energy needs to be  established through planning and permit issues at the local level.  4.5 the first decade of renewable energy  financing  Worldwide, investments in renewable electricity and fuels  rose from uSD 45 billion in 2004 to uSD 270 billion in 2014.  but the growth was not constant. The peak was uSD 280  billion in 2011. but in 2012, this figure dropped slightly to  uSD 256 billion and to uSD 232 billion in 2013. One reason  was policy uncertainty in Europe and the united States along  with retroactive changes. This decrease did not, however,  reflect far lower global growth; rather, the cost of solar in  particular was plummeting. Indeed, though the cost of Pv  continued to drop, the total investment volume in renewables  grew by nearly a fifth in 2014.  for instance, investments in Pv dropped by more than a fifth  in 2013 compared to the previous year even though new  capacity installations grew by nearly a third. In 2014, four  more countries – especially in the developing world – began  building renewables in light of the falling costs.  The low risk involved in wind and solar power in particular –  which have no fuel costs – is increasingly attracting not only  commercial banks to the sector, but also pension funds,  insurance firms, and corporations outside the energy sector.  All of them are looking for stable, long-term returns.  Nonetheless, conventional financing models need to be  revised for renewables, which have a relatively high upfront  price tag compared to fossil and nuclear power generators.  Investment firms are coming up with new tools for this  purpose; they go by such names as sustainable yield bonds  and green bonds in the uS and renewable financing company  bonds in the uk. unconventional funding is also becoming  common, such as crowdfunding and community energy coops  (REN21-2014-b).5  4.5.1 investment by economic group (ren21 – 2015)6  Investments in renewables made in developing countries rose  only slightly year-over-year in 2014 by three percent, whereas  the growth in developing and emerging countries reached 36  percent, driven largely by China, brazil, and India. The share  of the developing and emerging world and global renewable  energy investments therefore reached a new all-time high of  49 percent in 2014, with China making up 63 percent of that  share, up only slightly from the previous year. but India’s  investments grew strongly by 14 percent in 2014. Likewise,  other countries in Asia/Oceania continue to post increasing  investments, up by nearly 9 percent in 2014 (REN21 2015).  In contrast, investments in Europe were flat that year and only  grew in the united States by seven percent. 2011 remains the  bumper year for renewable energy investments in these  regions. Outside of brazil and the united States, the  Americas posted 21 percent greater investments. The fastest  growth, however, came from the Middle East and Africa,  where 44 percent more was invested in 2014.  The top 10 list of countries by investment volume was fairly  balanced that year, consisting of four bRICS countries and  six developed countries. China made up a third of total  investments in first place, followed by the united States,  japan, the united kingdom, Germany, Canada, brazil, India,  the Netherlands, and South Africa.  In tenth place worldwide, South Africa was the leader in  Africa. It devoted roughly a third of its investments to wind  power in 2014, with just over two thirds going to  photovoltaics and CSP. The next largest renewable energy  investors in Africa were kenya, Algeria, Egypt, Nigeria, and  Tanzania (REN21 – 2015).  references    4.5.2 financing models  In 2015, uNEP and bloomberg New Energy finance  produced an overview of the various methods of collecting  funds for renewable energy projects (uNEP-bloomberg NEf  2015). They include the following:  • venture capital and private equity (vC/Pe): venture capital and  private equity investments in grew by more than a quarter  and 2014 but still remained below the third of the record  set in 2008. The united States is still the leader in vC  renewable energy investments, whereas equity-raising  sector in Europe shrink significantly in 2014 (REN21-2015).  • Publicly quoted companies: This sector grew by 42 percent in  2014, making it four times larger than it was in 2012  (REN21-2015). After years of little activity, public markets  became interested in small-scale hydropower and ocean  energy in 2014. In return, interest in biofuels and biomass  dropped and disappeared almost entirely for geothermal,  where investments were privatized (REN21-2015).  • asset finance, which includes funds from equity, loans, and  corporate balance sheets (but excludes refinancings).  Asset financing of utility-scale projects made up 62 percent  of total investments in renewable energy in 2014, an  increase of 10 percent.  • mergers and acquisitions, where new corporate buyers take  over the existing equity and debt of companies developing  and/or operating renewable energy projects. These  investments shrank by five percent in 2014 as the  consolidation phase drew towards an end, both in the wind  and solar sectors.  funding devoted to research and development (R&D)  remained relatively flat in 2014, rising by only two percent.  This figure includes both governmental and corporate  budgets. for the fourth year in a row, more money was  invested in solar R&D than all other renewable energy sectors  combined. R&D investments in the wind sector fell last year,  while they rose slightly for solar at two percent. More funding  was devoted, however, to R&D for biofuels, biomass, and  ocean energy (REN21-2015). Europe remains a hotspot for  renewable energy R&D with more than a third of total  investments here – nearly as much as the united States and  China combined.  Small-scale distributed renewable energy projects continue  to make up a bigger share of the total, however, rising by a  third to 27 percent of total investments in 2014. Most of  these projects are rooftop photovoltaics (REN21-2015).    57  4.5.3 investment sources as of 2014  Clean energy funds and crowdfunding are the new kids on  the financing block. Issues of green bonds hit a record level  last year, especially due to a doubling of the volume among  development banks, such as the World bank and national  government agencies. for instance, brazil’s bNDES was the  leader in utility-scale asset financing, pushing the European  Investment bank into second place. Likewise, corporate  green energy bonds grew fivefold.  In 2014, two new South-South development banks were also  created: the New Development bank and the Asian  Infrastructure Investment bank. The five bRICS countries  each contributed uSD 10 billion to the former, which will go  into business in 2016 with a focus on infrastructure and  sustainable development. The latter brought together 23  Asian countries (not including japan and South korea). It is  expected to go into business in late 2015 with an initial  budget of uSD 50 billion, most of which came from China.  up to now, it has been commonly assumed that markets  would eventually drive renewable energy growth without  specific policy support when the cost of renewables is  competitive with conventional energy. Now that that point of  intersection is being reached, it is becoming clear that  policymakers will continue to play a role. As this chapter  illustrates, policy will still be needed to facilitate investments.  The electrification of the transport sector will also require  infrastructure decisions that governments can help make.  Likewise, renewable heating and cooling – where the public  will make investments as much as energy experts will –  requires both awareness-raising and incentives. finally, as  the share of renewable energy increases in power supply, the  focus will turn from the cost of a kilowatt-hour from a  generator towards overall system costs. Here, policymakers  will be needed to ensure that incumbents do not overly  protect their stranded investments.    s c e n a r i o f o r a f u t u r e e n e r gy s u P P ly  image hundreds of Millions of tonnes of sand and dust Particles are lifted froM north african deserts each year and carried across the atlantic ocean. dust Picked uP froM the  bodélé dePression in chad—farther inland than in the storM shown above—has rock Minerals loaded with PhosPhorus, an essential nutrient for Plant Proteins and growth. the  aMazon rainforest dePends on this dust to flourish because soil nutrients are in short suPPly in aMazonian soils.  scenario storylines and  main premises  scenario approach and  background studies  scenario regions main scenario assumptions  review: greenpeace scenario  projections of the past  only the most  agressive growth  projections such as  the greenpeace  scenarios has been  close to accurate”  “  © nasa earth observatory images by jesse allen  59  Moving from principles to action for energy supply that  mitigates against climate change requires a long-term  perspective. Energy infrastructure takes time to build up; new  energy technologies take time to develop. Policy shifts often  also need many years to take effect. In most world regions  the transformation from fossil to renewable energy will require  additional investment and higher supply costs over about  twenty years. However, there will be tremendous economic  benefits in the long term, due to much lower consumption of  increasingly expensive, rare or imported fuels. Any analysis  that seeks to tackle energy and environmental issues  therefore needs to look ahead at least until mid-century.  Scenarios are necessary to describe possible development  paths, to give decision-makers a broad overview and  indicate how far they can shape the future energy system.  Three scenarios are used here to show the wide range of  possible pathways in each world region for a future energy  supply system:  • a reference scenario, reflecting a continuation of current  trends and policies  • the energy [r]evolution scenario, designed to achieve a set of  environmental policy targets resulting in an optimistic but  still feasible pathway towards a widely decarbonised  energy system by 2050 in close relation to basic framework  assumptions of the Reference scenario  • the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario, representing an  ambitious pathway towards a fully decarbonised energy  system already by 2050 with significant additional efforts  compared to the “basic” Energy [R]evolution scenario  5.1 scenario storylines and main premises  The reference scenario (ref) is based on the Current Policies  scenarios published by the International Energy Agency (IEA)  in World Energy Outlook 2014 (WEO 2014).1 It only takes into  account existing international energy and environmental  policies. Its assumptions include, for example, continuing  progress in electricity and gas market reforms, the  liberalisation of cross-border energy trade and recent policies  designed to combat environmental pollution. The Reference  scenario does not include additional policies to reduce  greenhouse gas emissions. As the IEA’s projections only  extend to 2040, they are extended by extrapolating their key  macroeconomic and energy indicators forward to 2050. This  provides a baseline for comparison with the Energy  [R]evolution scenarios. unlike the previous Reference  scenario of the Energy [R]evolution study published in 2012,  it includes an increase in population and new market trends  for renewable technologies.  The energy [r]evolution scenario (e[r]) is an update of the  Energy [R]evolution scenario published in 2012, which  followed the key target to reduce worldwide carbon dioxide  emissions from energy use down to a level of around 4  gigatonnes per year by 2050 in order to hold the increase in  global temperature under +2°C. A second objective is the  global phasing out of nuclear energy. The new Energy  [R]evolution scenario takes into account developments  between the former base year 2009 and the new base year  2012 as well as changes in the new Reference scenario  based on WEO 2014, which serves as the baseline for  additional measures assumed in the Energy [R]evolution. In  addition, pathways for the deployment of renewable energy  and efficiency measures are revised, reflecting technology  trends of the last few years and new estimations of worldwide  potentials and investment costs leading to partly different  technology mixes. furthermore, the possibilities to implement  new technologies by 2020 are now more limited than in 2012  due to the required development time of new power plants  and other infrastructures. following the basic assumptions of  the Reference scenario, these changes lead to higher peaks  in energy demand and fossil energy supply compared to the  Energy [R]evolution of 2012. In consequence, there is a lower  decarbonisation pathway if we keep at the previous scenario  approach of the Energy [R]evolution. Nevertheless the  scenario still includes significant efforts to fully exploit the  large potential for energy efficiency, using currently available  best-practice technology. At the same time, various proven  renewable energy sources are integrated to a large extent for  heat and electricity generation as well as the production of  biofuels and hydrogen. The general framework parameters for  population and GDP growth remain unchanged from the  Reference scenario.  The new advanced energy [r]evolution scenario (adv e[r])  needs much stronger efforts to transform the energy systems  of all world regions towards a 100% renewable energy supply.  The consumption pathways remain basically the same as in  the E[R]; however, a much faster introduction of new  technologies leads to a complete decarbonisation of the  power, heat and especially the transportation sector. The  latter requires a strong role of hydrogen and other synthetic  fuels complementary to battery electric vehicle concepts and  (limited) biofuels. Due to higher efficiencies of new vehicle  concepts and the assumption of much higher modal split  changes compared to the basic E[R] resulting final energy  demand for transportation is lower. However, this scenario  requires more fundamental changes of mobility patterns,  behaviour, and infrastructural needs to compensate for the  high energy losses associated to the production of synthetic  fuels based on renewable electricity. Also in the heating  sector, electricity and hydrogen play a larger role substituting  remaining fossil fuels. In the power sector, natural gas is  replaced by hydrogen as well. Therefore, electricity  generation increases significantly in this scenario, assuming  power from renewable energy sources to be the main  “primary energy” of the future.   5  The scenario building follows for both Energy [R]evolution  scenarios a framework of targets and main premises that  strongly influences the development of individual  technological and structural pathways for each region and  each sector. The main premises considered for this scenario  building process are described in the following.  • Strong efficiency improvements and the dynamic expansion  of renewable energy in all sectors are the main strategies to  meet the overall target of CO2 emission reductions. CCS  technologies are not implemented, and nuclear power and  lignite power plants are phased out quickly, followed by  hard coal power plants. In developing countries in  particular, a shorter operational lifetime for coal power  plants (20 instead of 35 years) is assumed in order to allow  a faster uptake of renewable energy. based on current  knowledge about potentials, costs and recent trends in  renewable energy deployment (see next section on  ‘Scenario approach and background studies’), a dynamic  further growth of capacities for renewable heat and power  generation is assumed.  • The global quantities of biomass power generators and  large hydro power remain limited in the Energy [R]evolution  scenarios, for reasons of ecological sustainability. Wind  power and solar power (both photovoltaics and  concentrating solar power (CSP)) are expected to be the  main pillars of future power supply, complemented by  smaller contributions from geothermal (hydrothermal and  Enhanced Geothermal Systems (EGS)), ocean energy and  the further expansion of small and medium sized hydro  power. The scenarios follow the strategy to limit the share  of fluctuating power generation and to maintain a sufficient  share of dispatchable, secured capacity. Therefore, power  generation from biomass and CSP but also a sufficient  share of gas-fired back-up capacities and storage are  important factors for the security of supply in future energy  systems.  • Global sustainable biomass potentials are assumed to be  limited to less than 100 Ej according to background  studies. Traditional biomass use is largely replaced by  state-of-the-art technologies, primarily highly efficient  cogeneration plants. In developing regions with a high  share of traditional biomass use an implementation of  improved cooking stoves is assumed. No biomass trade is  considered between world regions for the scenarios.  However, the large-scale import of electricity from CSP is a  promising option for some world regions, especially for  OECD Europe, where a net import of up to 400 to 600 TWh  per year from North Africa and the Middle East is assumed  in the scenarios. CSP implementation after 2030 is  assumed for all regions with a solar multiple of 3 and  thermal energy storage able to provide energy for 12 h per  day of full-load operation of the turbine.  • Efficiency savings in the transport sector are a result of fleet  penetration with new highly efficient vehicle concepts, such  as electric vehicles but also assumed changes in mobility  patterns and the implementation of efficiency measures for  combustion engines. Mobility demand is expected to  increase strongly in developing countries. The scenarios  assume a limited use of biofuels for transportation following  the latest scientific reports indicating that biofuels might  have a higher greenhouse gas emission footprint than fossil  fuels. There are no global sustainability standards for  biofuels yet, which would be needed to avoid deforestation  and competition with food crops.  • Efficiency in use of electricity and fuels in ‘industry’ and  ‘other sectors’ has been re-evaluated based on technical  efficiency potentials and energy intensities (see also next  section ‘Scenario approach and background studies’). A  consistent approach is used to layout feasible, rather  conservative pathways and result in converging specific  consumptions in all world regions. In consequence, specific  energy use for all applications and in all regions is assumed  to decrease significantly.  • Hydrogen generated by electrolysis using renewable  electricity is introduced as a third renewable fuel in the  transportation sector complementary to biofuels and the  direct use of renewable electricity. Hydrogen generation  can have high energy losses; however, the limited  potentials of biofuels and probably also battery electric  mobility makes it necessary to have a third renewable  option. Alternatively, this renewable hydrogen could be  converted into synthetic methane and liquid fuels  depending on economic benefits (storage costs vs.  additional losses) as well as technology and market  development in the transport sector (combustion engines  vs. fuel cells). The Advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario  takes this strategy one step further, increasing the share of  electric and fuel cell vehicles. Additionally, renewable  hydrogen is converted into synthetic hydrocarbons, which  replace the remaining fossil fuels, especially for heavy duty  vehicles and air transportation, albeit with low overall  efficiency of the synfuel system.  • The Energy [R]evolution scenarios also foresee a shift in  the heat sector towards an increasing direct use of  electricity, thanks to the enormous and diverse potential  for renewable power and the limited availability of  renewable fuels for high temperature process heat in  industry. In addition, a fast expansion of the use of district  heating and geothermal heat pumps is assumed, leading  to an increase in electricity demand, which partly offsets  the efficiency savings in these sectors. A faster expansion  of solar and geothermal heating systems is also assumed.  In the Advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario hydrogen  replaces 30-40% of the remaining gas consumption in  2040 and 100% in 2050 – not only for industry, but also for  power production in cogeneration and gas power stations,  providing back up capacities for variable power production  as from wind and Pv.  60    5  61  • The increasing shares of fluctuating renewable power  generation above all by wind farms and photovoltaics  require implicitly the implementation of smart grids and a  fast expansion of transmission grids, storage, and other  load balancing capacities. Other infrastructural needs result,  for instance, from an increasing role of district heating,  electric and hydrogen mobility and the generation and  distribution of synthetic fuels. In both Energy [R]evolution  scenarios, it is therefore implicitly assumed that such  infrastructural projects will be implemented in all regions  without serious societal, economic and political barriers.  • The scenarios only consider regional demand and supply  excluding bunker fuels for international marine shipping and  international air transportation. Today, 14% of all fossil  transport fuels are used for bunkers. In order to replace  bunker fuels entirely with renewables, a combination of  energy efficiency and renewable fuels is required. Largescale  biomass use for an additional biofuel generation is  possible within the limit of the assumed sustainable  biomass potential. However, it’s obvious, that - depending  on demand development – an additional large-scale  generation of synthetic liquid hydrocarbons is necessary for  a complete decarbonisation of bunker fuels. We estimate  this additional demand in the range of 7,000 to 9,000 Pj of  biofuels and synfuels, respectively. The latter would require  an additional generation of renewable electricity of about  5,000 to 6,000 TWh per year.  The Energy [R]evolution scenarios by no means claim to  predict the future; they simply describe and compare three  potential development pathways out of the broad range of  possible ‘futures’. The Energy [R]evolution scenarios are  designed to indicate the efforts and actions required to  achieve their ambitious targets and to illustrate the options  we have at hand to change our energy supply system into  one that is truly sustainable. They may serve as a consistent  basis for further analyses of possible ways and concepts to  implement the energy transition.  5.2 scenario approach and background studies  The Energy [R]evolution scenarios are target-oriented  scenarios. Therefore, they must not be interpreted as a  “forecast” of the future development of the energy systems.  The scenarios are developed using a primarily “bottom-up”  approach (technology-driven). Assumed growth rates for  population, GDP, specific energy demand and the  deployment of renewable energy technology are important  drivers. Quantified targets for transforming the energy  systems set the framework for their design. The supply  scenarios were calculated using the Mesap/PlaNet simulation  model adopted in the previous Energy [R]evolution studies.2  This model does not use a cost optimization approach for the  calculation of energy technology expansion rather it requires  a consistent exogenous definition of feasible developments in  order to meet the targets. using assumptions and  background information about technical and structural  options for the transformation of the energy system, and  taking into account – as far as possible – possible barriers  and limits, consistent development paths are defined and  integrated into the model database. The model as accounting  framework then calculates the energy balances of the future  for all sectors as well as related investments and costs in the  power sector.  The scenarios in this report were commissioned by  Greenpeace from the Systems Analysis group of the Institute  of Engineering Thermodynamics, part of the German  Aerospace Center (DLR). The Energy [R]evolution scenarios  are based on a series of studies developed for previous  Energy [R]evolution versions that are – unless otherwise noted  – described in detail in the Energy [R]evolution study of 2012.3  Structure and initial parametrization of the energy system for  each world region are extracted from the extended energy  balances published in 2014 by International Energy Agency  (IEA) (‘Energy balances of non-OECD countries’ and ‘Energy  balances of OECD countries’). The Reference scenario and  related specific data – such as efficiencies, load factors and  demand intensities – are based on the Current Policies  scenario published by the IEA in World Energy Outlook 2014.  The energy demand projections for the Energy [R]evolution  scenarios are also based on a study from the university of  utrecht, Netherlands, analysing the future potential for energy  efficiency measures for the Energy [R]evolution 2012 (Graus  2012).4 New insights on energy demand in developing  countries, for instance for Africa from the WEO 2014, and  new assumptions about living standards, energy savings and  possible rebound effects are included as well.  The biomass potential calculated for previous editions,  judged according to Greenpeace sustainability criteria, has  been developed by the German biomass Research Centre in  20095 and has been further reduced for precautionary  principles. The dynamic expansion of renewable energy  defined in the scenarios is based on recent technology  trends,6 current knowledge about regional renewable energy  potentials and costs for their deployment7 and market  development projections of the renewable energy industry.8    The future development pathway for cars and other  transportation technologies is based on a special report  produced in 2012 by the Institute of vehicle Concepts, DLR for  Greenpeace International (DLR 2012).9 The aim was to produce  a demanding but feasible scenario to lower global CO2  emissions from transport in keeping with the overall targets.  The approach takes into account a vast range of technical  measures to reduce the energy consumption of vehicles, but  also considers the dramatic increase in vehicle ownership and  annual mileage taking place in developing countries. The major  parameters are vehicle technology, alternative fuels, changes  in sales of different vehicle sizes of light duty vehicles (called  the segment split) and changes in tonne-kilometres and  vehicle-kilometres travelled (described as modal split). The  Institute carried out new technical research for Greenpeace in  early 2015, focusing on the latest developments of land-based  transport systems, especially for megacities (DLR 2015).10  Assumptions for fossil fuel resources and planned and ongoing  investments in coal, gas and oil on a global and regional basis  are based on a study by the Ludwig bölkow System Technik  Institute, commissioned by Greenpeace for the Energy  [R]evolution study of 2012. Technology and cost projections for  the heating sector are adopted from a background study  commissioned by EREC from DLR about the current renewable  heating technology markets, market forecasts, cost projections  and state of the technology development. Details can be found  as well in the Energy [R]evolution study of 2012.  5.3 scenario regions  To develop a global energy scenario requires a model that  reflects the significant structural differences between different  countries’ energy supply systems. The International Energy  Agency breakdown of ten world regions, as used in the ongoing  series of World Energy Outlook reports, has been  chosen because the IEA also provides the most  comprehensive global energy statistic11. This scenario edition  maintains the ten regions approach. The countries in each of  the world regions are listed in Table 5.1.    Regional specifics play an important role for the layout of the  scenario pathways.  The oeCd europe region includes countries with quite different  energy supply systems, potentials of renewable energy sources,  as well as power and heat demand patterns. High solar  potentials and low heat demand for buildings are characteristic  for the south. The northern and western parts of Europe have  high wind potentials, especially wind offshore. In northern and  central Europe we find high potentials for hydro power and a  high energy demand for space heating (as in eastern Europe).  biomass potentials exist predominantly in the north and east  and are limited above all in the southern regions. Industrial  demand for electricity and process heat is quite different in  highly industrialized countries such as Scandinavian countries,  Germany or france compared to some eastern and southern  countries. In most European countries we already have policies  and market mechanisms for the implementation of renewable  energy, above all in the Eu member countries. The European  Network of Transmission System Operators (entso-e) can serve  as a well-established basis for the further development of an  interconnected European grid, which would be able to  implement large-scale and long-range transmission of  renewable power to demand centres. This may lead as well to  important interconnections to the Middle East/North Africa  region and Eastern Europe/Eurasia.  The energy system in oeCd north america – uS, Canada, and  Mexico – is dominated by developments in the uS, where  more than 80% of the region’s demand occurs. In the highly  developed countries of the uS and Canada, reduction of  specific energy demand through higher efficiency plays a  crucial role for the decarbonisation of OECD North America’s  energy system. In Mexico, in contrast, increasing living  standards and increasing population will result in increasing  demand, despite ambitious increases in efficiency. The high  potentials for concentrating solar power (CSP) in Mexico and  the uS will allow for the large-scale use of CSP plants for grid  balancing and grid stabilization, reducing the demand for  power storages, demand side management and other  balancing options compared to other world regions. In the  large metropolitan areas in these countries, electromobility  and hydrogen cars will penetrate into the market earlier and  at a faster pace than in most other world regions.  oeCd asia oceania consists of two islands – japan and New  zealand – the peninsula South korea and the continent of  Australia. This world region is dominated by the high energy  demand in japan, which has rather limited renewable energy  resources. The lack of physical grid connections prevents power  transmission between these countries. Thus it is a huge effort to  supply the large japanese nation with renewable energy, and  stabilize the fluctuating wind power, without tapping the large  solar potential in other countries such as Australia. Hydrogen  and synfuels here not only serve for long-term storage of  renewable power, but also as an option for balancing renewable  energy supply across borders. An early market introduction of  fuel cell cars in japan may support such a strategy.  The region eastern europe/eurasia includes some Eu member  countries of the East that are not part of the OECD, some  other countries of the former yugoslav Republic and several  countries of the former Soviet union. However, it is  dominated by the economy and energy system of Russia. The  main energy carrier of today is natural gas followed by oil.  The region has large energy resources regarding biomass and  wind power but also geothermal energy and photovoltaics.  Eastern Europe/Eurasia is the only world region that may face  a significant population decrease due to the expected  demographic development above all in Russia.  latin america is dominated by the energy system of brazil,  which accounts for around half of the energy demand. Latin  America has the highest urbanization rate of all non-OECD  regions, providing opportunities for a large-scale electrification  of heat and transport sectors based on renewable resources.  biomass potentials in Latin America are high and available for  biofuel production. Particularly brazil already has a long history  of biofuel cars on the market. Latin America has also high  potentials for photovoltaics and concentrating solar power  plants (CSP). According to the WEO 2014 Electricity  database,16 Latin America has a national electrification rate of  95% and an average of 82% in rural areas (year 2012). The  WEO 2014 biomass database17 shows that a population of 68  million still relied on traditional use of biomass for cooking.  the middle east consists of a series of oil dependent countries,  that all share a tremendous solar potential. Transport demand  in the Middle East is very high. One reason is the lack of  regional rail transportation. There is a high rate of electricity  access in urban areas, where currently almost 70% of the fast  growing population lives (WEO 2014). Thus, electrification of  transport is a main target in the Energy [R]evolution scenarios.  for many of the Middle East countries, water scarcity is a  problem. Here opportunities arise to combine large  concentrating solar power plants with water desalination,  reducing pressure on the water supply systems.  africa is a very heterogeneous region, united only by a very fast  population growth. It combines arid northern Africa,  underdeveloped Sub-Saharan Africa, and the emerging energy  market of South Africa. Northern Africa features a high  electrification rate, high CSP potential and water scarcity. Sub-  Saharan Africa is characterized by a low urbanization and a lack  of access to electricity for two-thirds of its people (WEO 2014).  The dependency on traditional biomass use is strong, with over  700 million people relying on fuel wood or charcoal for cooking in  inefficient cooking stoves or open fires, with an efficiency of 10-  20%. An introduction of efficient technologies will scarcely reduce  absolute energy demand but will increase living standards. The  picture is somewhat different in South Africa, featuring a coal-based  energy system and a comparatively stable and well  connected electricity grid, with access to electricity for already  more than 85% of its population in 2012 (WEO 2014).    india has a fast-growing population of over 1.2 billion people  and is the seventh-largest country by area. However,  population density is already 2.7 times higher than in China.  Due to its climate, India has a rather limited CSP potential.  Wind power potential is expected to be limited due to land  use constraints; however, a large technical potential can be  estimated from available meteorological data. According to  the WEO 2014 database, electricity access is on average  75%, with 94% in urban areas and 67% in rural areas. In  India, about 815 million people still relied on the traditional  use of biomass for cooking in 2012. Due to population and  GDP growth, increasing living standards, and mobility, it is  expected that final energy demand in India will further  increase significantly, although large potentials for efficiency  savings exist.  China has large potentials for renewable energy resources,  especially for solar thermal power generation in the west,  wind onshore in the north and wind offshore in the east and  southeast. Photovoltaic power generation could play an  important role throughout all regions. Expansion of  hydropower generation is currently also seen a major  strategy; however, potentials for small hydro are rather low.  China will face further large increases in energy demand in all  sectors of the energy system. Chinese economic prosperity  has been underpinned mainly by coal, which provides over  two-thirds of China’s primary energy supply today (IEA WEO  2014). The increase in electricity use due to higher  electrification rates will be a major factor for the successful  expansion of renewable energy in the industry, buildings and  transportation sectors. In China, nearly all households are  connected to the electricity grid. but according to WEO  2014, about 450 million Chinese still relied on the traditional  use of biomass for cooking in 2012. China has pledged to  curtail CO2 emissions before 2030 and has already some  ambitious political targets for renewable energy deployment.  The other asia region includes all developing countries of Asia  except China and India. This group covers a large spectrum in  terms of size, economy, stability, development status and a  large spread geographically from the Arabian Sea into the  Pacific. Electricity access is quite different in these countries  as well according to WEO 2014. In southeast Asia, we find an  average access of 77 %, with only one third of population in  Myanmar and Cambodia and nearly 100% access in  Singapore, Thailand and vietnam. In Indonesia, we find 76%  (92% in urban areas), in bangladesh 60% (90%), and in  Pakistan 69% (88%). In southeast Asia, 46% of the population  still relies on traditional biomass use with the highest shares in  Myanmar (93%) and Cambodia (89%). In Indonesia, 42%, in  bangladesh 89% and in Pakistan 62% still used biomass for  cooking in 2012. The lowest values can be found in Singapore  (0%), Malaysia (0%) and Thailand (24%). The scenarios thus  cover the whole band width of renewable sources and  technological development, even though the outlook for each  country might deviate largely from the average.  5.4 main scenario assumptions  5.4.1 population development  future population development is an important factor in  energy scenario building because population size affects the  size and composition of energy demand, directly and through  its impact on economic growth and development. The IEA  World Energy Outlook 2014 uses the united Nations  Development Programme (uNDP) projections for population  development. for this study the same population projections  from uNDP up to 2050 are applied.18  Table 5.2 shows that, based on uNEP World Population  Prospect 2012 (medium fertility variant), the world’s  population is expected to grow by 0.8 % per year on average  over the period 2015 to 2050, from 7.3 billion people in 2009  to nearly 9.5 billion by 2050. The rate of population growth  will slow over the projection period, from 1.1% per year  during 2012-2020 to 0.6% per year during 2040-2050. The  updated projections show an increase in population  estimates by 2050 of around 250 million compared to the  uNDP 2010 edition, which was used for the Energy  [R]evolution 2012. from a regional perspective, the  population of the developing regions will continue to grow  most rapidly. The region Eastern Europe/Eurasia will face a  continuous decline (7% in total between 2012 and 2050),  followed after a short while by the OECD Asia Oceania  countries and also China. The population in OECD Europe  and OECD North America are expected to increase through  2050. The share of the population living in today’s non-OECD  countries will increase from the current 82% to 85% in 2050.  China’s contribution to world population will drop from 20%  today to 15% in 2050. Africa will remain the region with the  highest growth rate, leading to a share of 25% of world  population in 2050.  Satisfying the energy needs of a growing population in the  developing regions of the world in an environmentally friendly  manner is the fundamental challenge to achieve a global  sustainable energy supply.  64    5  65  5.4.2 economic growth  Economic growth is a key driver for energy demand. Since  1971, each 1% increase in global Gross Domestic Product  (GDP) has been accompanied by a 0.6% increase in primary  energy consumption. The decoupling of energy demand and  GDP growth is therefore a prerequisite for an Energy  [R]evolution. Most global energy/economic/environmental  models constructed in the past have relied on market  exchange rates to place countries in a common currency for  estimation and calibration. This approach has been the  subject of considerable discussion in recent years, and an  alternative has been proposed in the form of purchasing  power parity (PPP) exchange rates. Purchasing power  parities compare the costs in different currencies of a fixed  basket of traded and non-traded goods and services and  yield a widely-based measure of the standard of living. This is  important in analysing the main drivers of energy demand or  for comparing energy intensities among countries.  Although PPP assessments are still relatively imprecise  compared to statistics based on national income and product  trade and national price indexes, they are considered to  provide a better basis for global scenario development.19  Thus all data on economic development in WEO 2014 refers  to purchasing power adjusted GDP. However, as WEO 2014  only covers the time period up to 2040 projections for 2040-  2050 for the Energy [R]evolution scenarios are based on our  own estimates.  Prospects for GDP growth have decreased considerably  since the previous study, due to the financial crisis at the  beginning of 2009, although underlying growth trends  continue much the same. GDP growth in all regions is  expected to slow gradually over the coming decades. World  GDP is assumed to grow on average by 3.4% per year over  the period 2012-2040. China and India are expected to grow  faster than other regions, followed by the Middle East, Africa,  other non-OECD Asia, and Eastern Europe/Eurasia. The  growth of the Chinese economy will slow as it becomes more  mature, but it will nonetheless become the largest in the  world in PPP terms by 2030. GDP in OECD Europe and  OECD Asia Oceania is assumed to grow by around 1.5% and  1.3% per year over the projection period, while economic  growth in OECD North America is expected to be slightly  higher. The OECD share of global PPP-adjusted GDP will  decrease from 53% in 2012 to 32% in 2050.    5.4.3 oil and gas price projections  The recent dramatic fluctuations in global oil prices have  been significant and with influence on price projections.  under the 2004 ‘high oil and gas price’ scenario from the  European Commission, for example, an oil price of just  $34 per barrel was assumed in 2030. More recent projections  of oil prices by 2040 in the IEA’s WEO 2014 range from  $2013100/bbl in the 450 ppm scenario up to $2013155/bbl in the  Current Policies scenario.  Since the first Energy [R]evolution study was published in  2007, the actual price of oil has moved over $100/bbl for the  first time, and in july 2008 reached a record high of more  than $140/bbl. Oil prices then fell back to $100/bbl in  September 2008 and around $80/bbl in April 2010, but  afterwards again increased to more than $110/bbl in early  2012. beginning in 2014, oil prices plummeted to values  between 40 and 60 $/bbl in 2015 due to the global economic  situation and market reasons. Taking into account expected  growth in global energy demand in mid-term and long-term  projections, the 2015 revision of the Energy [R]evolution  scenarios assumed fossil fuel price projections according to  the World Energy Outlook 2014. In contrast to the previous  Energy [R]evolution editions, the result is different  assumptions for the Reference scenario compared to the  Energy [R]evolution scenarios.  As the supply of natural gas is limited by the availability of  pipeline infrastructure, there is no world market price for gas.  In most regions of the world the gas price is directly tied to  the price of oil.    5.4.4 cost projections for efficient fossil fuel  generation and carbon capture and storage (ccs)  and co2 emissions  Specific investment and operation costs of coal, gas, lignite  and oil power plants are assumed according to WEO 2014  Special report on investments.20 because they are at an  advanced stage of technology and market development, the  potential for cost reductions is limited.  There is much speculation about the potential for carbon  capture and storage (CCS) to mitigate the effect of fossil fuel  consumption on climate change, even though the technology  is still under development. Assumptions about costs,  effectiveness and environmental effects of CCS are highly  speculative, therefore CCS power plants are not included in  the Energy [R]evolution analysis. More details can be found in  the previous Energy [R]evolution edition of 2012.  Prospects for establishing an effective global carbon emissions  trading system across all world regions are currently at best  unclear. In contrast to the previous Energy [R]evolution  scenario, the 2015 revision sets aside CO2 pricing altogether.  Cost comparisons between the scenarios thus only rely on  investment, operation & maintenance and fuel costs.  Table 5.5 summarises our assumptions on the technical and  economic parameters of future fossil-fuelled power plant  technologies. based on estimates from WEO 2014, we  assume that further technical innovation will not prevent an  increase of future investment costs because raw material  costs and technical complexity will continue to increase.  Also, improvements in power plant efficiency are outweighed  by the expected increase in fossil fuel prices, in which would  make electricity generation costs increase significantly.  5.4.5 cost projections for renewable energy  technologies  The different renewable energy technologies available today all  have different technical maturity, costs and development potential.  Whereas hydro power has been widely used for decades, other  technologies, such as the gasification of biomass or ocean  energy, have yet to find their way to market maturity. Some  renewable sources by their very nature, including wind and solar  power, provide a variable supply, requiring a revised coordination  with the grid network. but although in many cases renewable  energy technologies are ‘distributed’ - their output being  generated and delivered locally to the consumer – in the future we  can also have large-scale applications like offshore wind parks,  photovoltaic power plants or concentrating solar power stations.    It is possible to develop a wide spectrum of options to market  maturity, using the individual advantages of the different  technologies, linking them with each other, and integrating  them step by step into the existing supply structures. This  approach will provide a complementary portfolio of  environmentally friendly technologies for heat and power  supply and the provision of transport fuels.  Many of the renewable technologies employed today are at a  relatively early stage of market development. As a result, the  costs of electricity, heat and fuel production are generally  higher than those of competing conventional systems - a  reminder that the environmental and social costs of  conventional power production are not reflected in market  prices. It is expected, however that large cost reductions can  come from technical advances, manufacturing improvements  and large-scale production, unlike conventional technologies.  The dynamic trend of cost developments over time plays a  crucial role in identifying economically sensible expansion  strategies for scenarios spanning several decades.  To identify long-term cost developments, learning curves have  been applied to the model calculations to reflect the how cost  of a particular technology change in relation to the cumulative  production volumes. for many technologies, the learning  factor (or progress ratio) is between 0.75 for less mature  systems to 0.95 and higher for well-established technologies.  A learning factor of 0.9 means that costs are expected to fall  by 10% every time the cumulative output from the technology  doubles. Empirical data shows, for example, that the learning  factor for Pv solar modules has been fairly constant at 0.8  over 30 years whilst that for wind energy varies from 0.75 in  the uk to 0.94 in the German market.  Assumptions on future costs for renewable electricity  technologies in the Energy [R]evolution scenario of 2012 were  derived from a review of learning curve studies, for example  by Lena Neij,21 from the analysis of technology foresight and  road mapping studies, including the European Commission  funded NEEDS project (New Energy Externalities  Developments for Sustainability)22 or the IEA Energy  Technology Perspectives 2008, projections by the European  Renewable Energy Council published in April 2010 (“Re-  Thinking 2050”) and discussions with experts from different  sectors of the renewable energy industry. for the new Energy  [R]evolution, cost decreases due to recent market  developments are taken into account, leading to changes in  own cost assumptions above all for photovoltaics and solar  thermal power plants (including heat storages). However, for  the reason of consistency, region-specific cost assumptions  from WEO 2014 are adopted for biomass power plants,  hydro, wind power and ocean energy. The following tables  exemplarily show data used for the region OECD Europe.  photovoltaics  The worldwide photovoltaics (Pv) market has been growing at  25% per annum in recent years, reaching 40 GW of new  installed capacity in 201423 and is starting to make a  significant contribution to electricity generation. Photovoltaics  are important because of its decentralised/centralised  character, its flexibility for use in an urban environment and  huge potential for cost reduction. The Pv industry has been  increasingly exploiting this potential during the last few years,  with installation prices more than halving in the last few years.  Current development is focused on improving existing  modules and system components by increasing their energy  efficiency and reducing material usage. Technologies like Pv  thin film (using alternative semiconductor materials) or dye  sensitive solar cells are developing quickly and present a huge  potential for cost reduction. The mature technology crystalline  silicon, with a proven lifetime of 30 years, is continually  increasing its cell and module efficiency (by 0.5% annually),  whereas the cell thickness is rapidly decreasing (from 230 to  180 microns over the last five years). Commercial module  efficiency varies from 14 to 21%, depending on silicon quality  and fabrication process.  The learning factor for Pv modules has been fairly constant  over the last 30 years with costs reducing by 20% each time  the installed capacity doubles, indicating a high rate of  technical learning. Assuming a globally installed capacity of  5,000 to 7,000 GW between 2040 and 2050 in the Energy  [R]evolution scenario, and with an electricity output of 7,000  to 10,000 TWh/a, we can expect that generation costs of  around 4-7 cents/kWh (depending on the region) will be  achieved. Pv has already become competitive with retail  electricity prices in some parts of the world, and will become  competitive with fossil fuel costs soon.    concentrating solar power (csp)  ‘Concentrating’ solar thermal power stations can only use  direct sunlight and therefore depend on very sunny locations.  North Africa, for example, has a technical potential for this  technology which far exceeds local demand. The various solar  thermal technologies (detailed in Chapter 10) have good  prospects for further development and cost reductions.  because of their more simple design, ‘fresnel’ collectors are  considered as an option for additional cost trimming. The  efficiency of central receiver systems can be increased by  producing compressed air at a temperature of up to 1,000 C°,  which is then used to run a combined gas and steam turbine.  Thermal storage systems are a way for CSP electricity  generators to reduce costs and to provide flexible and  dispatchable capacity. The Spanish Andasol 1 plant, for  example, is equipped with molten salt storage with a capacity  of 7.5 hours. A higher level of full load operation can be  realised by using a thermal storage system and a larger  collector field. Although this leads to higher investment costs,  it reduces the cost of electricity generation.  Depending on the level of irradiation and mode of operation,  it is expected that long term future electricity generation  costs of 7-10 cents/kWh can be achieved. This presupposes  rapid market introduction in the next few years.  wind power  Within a short period of time, the dynamic development of  wind power has resulted in the establishment of a flourishing  global market of over 50 GW in 2014.24 In Europe, favourable  policy incentives were the early drivers for the global wind  market. However, since 2009 more than three quarters of the  annual capacity installed was outside Europe and this trend is  likely to continue. The boom in demand for wind power  technology has nonetheless led to supply constraints and  stagnating markets. As a consequence, the cost of new  systems has increased. The industry is continuously  expanding production capacity, however, so it is already  resolving the bottlenecks in the supply chain and in 2014  market development again gained speed and increased by 6-  10 GW compared to the years before. Taking into account  market development projections, learning curve analysis and  industry expectations, investment costs for wind turbines are  reduced in the scenario by 13% for onshore and 47% for  offshore installations up to 2050.  biomass  The crucial factor for the economics of using biomass for  energy is the cost of the feedstock, which today ranges from  a negative for waste wood (based on credit for waste  disposal costs avoided) through inexpensive residual  materials to the more expensive energy crops. The resulting  spectrum of energy generation costs is correspondingly  broad. One of the most economic options is the use of waste  wood in steam turbine combined heat and power (CHP)  plants. Gasification of solid biomass, on the other hand,  which has a wide range of applications, is still relatively  expensive. In the long term it is expected that using wood  gas both in micro CHP units (engines and fuel cells) and in  gas-and-steam power plants will have the most favourable  electricity production costs. Converting crops into ethanol  and ‘bio diesel’ made from rapeseed methyl ester (RME) has  become increasingly important in recent years, for example in  brazil, the uSA and Europe – although its climate benefit is  disputed. Processes for obtaining synthetic fuels from  biogenic synthesis gases will also play a larger role.    A large potential for exploiting modern technologies exists in  Latin and North America, Europe and Eastern Europe/Eurasia,  either in stationary appliances or the transport sector. In the  long term, Europe and Eastern Europe/Eurasia could realise  20-50% of the potential for biomass from energy crops, whilst  biomass use in all the other regions will have to rely on forest  residues, industrial wood waste and straw. In Latin America,  North America and Africa in particular an increasing residue  potential will be available.  In other regions, such as the Middle East and all Asian  regions, increased use of biomass is restricted, either due to  a generally low availability or already high traditional use. for  the latter, using modern, more efficient technologies will  improve the sustainability of current usage and have positive  side effects, such as reducing indoor pollution and the heavy  workloads currently associated with traditional biomass use.  geothermal  Geothermal energy has long been used worldwide for  supplying heat, and since the beginning of the last century for  electricity generation. Geothermally generated electricity was  previously limited to sites with specific geological conditions,  but further intensive research and development work widened  potential sites. In particular the creation of large underground  heat exchange surfaces - Enhanced Geothermal Systems  (EGS) - and the improvement of low temperature power  conversion, for example with the Organic Rankine Cycle,  could make it possible to produce geothermal electricity  anywhere. Advanced heat and power cogeneration plants will  also improve the economics of geothermal electricity.  A large part of the costs for a geothermal power plant come  from deep underground drilling, so further development of  innovative drilling technology is expected. Assuming a global  average market growth for geothermal power capacity  increasing to 30% per year after 2020, adjusting to 14%  beyond 2030, the result would be a cost reduction potential  of more than 60% by 2050:  • for conventional geothermal power, from 15 cents/kWh to  about 9 cents/kWh;  • for EGS, despite the presently high figures (about 20  cents/kWh), electricity production costs - depending on the  payments for heat supply - are expected to come down to  around 8 cents/kWh in the long term.  because of its non-fluctuating supply and flexibility of  operation, geothermal energy could be a key element in a  future supply structure based on renewable sources. up to  now we have only used a marginal part of the potential.  Shallow geothermal drilling, for example, can deliver of  heating at any time anywhere, and can be used for thermal  energy storage.  ocean energy  Ocean energy, particularly offshore wave energy, is a  significant resource, and has the potential to satisfy an  important percentage of electricity supply worldwide.  Globally, the potential of ocean energy has been estimated at  around 90,000 TWh/year. The most significant advantages  are the vast availability and high predictability of the resource  and a technology with very low visual impact and no CO2  emissions. Many different concepts and devices have been  developed, including taking energy from the tides, waves,  currents and both thermal and saline gradient resources.  Many of these are in an advanced phase of research &  development, large scale prototypes have been deployed in  real sea conditions and some have reached pre-market  deployment. There are a few grid connected, fully operational  commercial wave and tidal generating plants.  The cost of energy from initial tidal and wave energy farms  has been estimated to be in the range of 20-80 €cents/kWh,25  70    and for initial tidal stream farms in the range of  11-22 €cents/kWh with significant learning prospects. key  areas for development will include concept design,  optimisation of the device configuration, reduction of capital  costs by exploring the use of alternative structural materials,  economies of scale and learning from operation. According to  the latest research findings, the learning factor is estimated to  be 10-15% for offshore wave and 5-10% for tidal stream. In the  long term, ocean energy has the potential to become one of  the most competitive and cost effective forms of generation. In  the next few years a dynamic market penetration is expected,  following a similar curve to wind energy.  because of the early development stage any future cost  estimates for ocean energy systems are uncertain.  hydropower  Hydropower is a mature technology with a significant part of its  global resource already exploited. There is still, however, some  potential left both for new schemes (especially small scale runof-  river projects with little or no reservoir impoundment) and for  repowering of existing sites. There is likely to be some more  potential for hydropower with the increasing need for flood  control and the maintenance of water supply during dry  periods. Sustainable hydropower makes an effort to integrate  plants with river ecosystems while reconciling ecology with  economically attractive power generation.  summary of renewable energy cost development  figure 5.1 summarises the cost trends for renewable power  technologies derived from the assumptions discussed above.  It is important to note that the expected cost reduction is not  a function of time, but of cumulative capacity (production of  units), so dynamic market development is required.  Reduced investment costs for renewable energy technologies  lead directly to lower heat and electricity generation costs, as  shown in figure 5.2. In the long term, full costs are expected  to converge at around 5 to 9 €cents/kWh (6-12 $cents/kWh),  except for biomass with about 12 €cents/kWh (15  $cents/kWh, calculated without heat credits for CHP). These  estimates depend on site-specific conditions such as the  local wind regime or solar irradiation, the availability of  biomass at reasonable prices or the credit granted for heat  supply in the case of combined heat and power generation.    5.4.6 cost projections for renewable heating  technologies  Renewable heating has the longest tradition of all renewable  technologies. for the previous Energy [R]evolution report  2012 EREC and DLR carried out a joint survey on costs of  renewable heating technologies in Europe. The report  analysed installation costs of renewable heating  technologies, ranging from direct solar collector systems to  geothermal and ambient heat applications and biomass  technologies. Some technologies are already mature and  compete on the market – especially simple heating systems  in the domestic sector. However, more sophisticated  technologies, which can provide higher shares of heat  demand from renewable sources, are still under development  and rather expensive. Market barriers slow down the further  implementation and cost reduction of renewable heating  systems, especially for heating networks. Nevertheless,  significant learning rates can be expected if renewable  heating is increasingly implemented as projected in the  Energy [R]evolution scenario.  solar thermal technologies  Solar collectors depend on direct solar irradiation, so the  yield strongly depends on the location. In very sunny regions,  simple thermosiphon systems can provide total hot water  demand in households at around 400 €/m2 installation costs.  In regions with less sun, where additional space heating is  needed, installation cost for pumped systems are twice as  high. In these areas, economies of scales can decrease solar  heating costs significantly. Large scale solar collector system  are known from 250-600 €/m2, depending on the share of  solar energy in the whole heating system and the level of  storage required.  deep geothermal applications  (Deep) geothermal heat from aquifers or reservoirs can be  used directly in hydrothermal heating plants to supply heat  demand close to the plant or in a district heating network for  several different types of heat (see Chapter 10). Due to the  high drilling costs deep geothermal energy is mostly feasibly  for large applications in combination with heat networks. It is  already economic feasible and in use for a long time, where  aquifers can be found near the surface, e.g. in the Pacific  Island or along the Pacific Ring of fire. Also in Europe deep  geothermal applications are being developed for heating  purposes at investment costs from 500€/kWth (shallow) to  3000 €/kWth (deep), with the costs strongly dependent on the  drilling depth.  heat pumps  Heat pumps typically provide hot water or space heat for  heating systems with relatively low supply temperature or can  serve as a supplement to other heating technologies. They  have become increasingly popular for underfloor heating in  buildings. Economies of scale are less important than for  deep geothermal, so there is focus on small household  applications with investment costs from 500-1,600 €/kW for  ground water systems and higher costs from  1,200-3,000 €/kW for ground source or aerothermal systems.  biomass applications  There is broad portfolio of modern technologies for heat  production from biomass, ranging from small scale single  room stoves to heating or CHP-plants in MW scale.  Investment costs show a similar variety: simple log wood  stoves can be obtained from 100 €/kW, more sophisticated  automated heating systems that cover the whole heat  demand of a building are significantly more expensive. Log  wood or pellet boilers range from 400-1,200 €/kW, with large  applications being cheaper than small systems.  Economy of scales apply to heating plants above 500 kW,  with investment cost between 400-700 €/kW. Heating plants  can deliver process heat or provide whole neighbourhoods  with heat. Even if heat networks demand additional  investment, there is great potential to use solid biomass for  heat generation in both small and large heating centres linked  to local heating networks.  Heat from cogeneration (CHP) is another option with a broad  range of technologies at hand. It is a very varied energy  technology – applying to co-firing in large coal-fired  cogeneration plants; biomass gasification combined with  CHP or biogas from wet residues. but the costs for heat are  often mainly dependent on the power production.  Main biomass input into renewable heating today is solid  biomass – wood in various specifications from waste wood  and residues to pellets from short rotation forestry. biomass  costs are as versatile: In Europe biomass costs ranged from  1-6 €/Gj for sawmill products, over 2-7 €/Gj for log wood to  6-18 €/Gj for wood pellets.26  Cost reductions expected vary strongly within each technology  sector, depending on the maturity of a specific technology. E.g.  small wood stoves will not see significant cost reductions,  while there is still learning potential for automated pellet  heating systems. Cost for simple solar collectors for swimming  pools might be already optimized, whereas integration in large  systems is neither technological nor economical mature. Table  5.13 shows average development pathways for a variety of  heat technology options.  72    5  73  5.4.7 assumptions for hydrogen and synfuel  production from renewable electricity  In the Energy [R]evolution scenarios hydrogen is introduced  as a substitute for natural gas with significant shares after  2030. Hydrogen is assumed to be produced via electrolysis,  resulting in an additional electricity demand fully supplied by  extra renewable power production capacities mainly from  wind, Pv and CSP.  Renewable hydrogen is essential in the Energy [R]evolution  scenarios for a variety of sectors:  In the power sector hydrogen replaces natural gas in gas  power plants with increasing shares after 2030, totally  replacing natural gas in the Advanced Energy [R]evolution  scenario by 2050. It thus serves as backup for fluctuating  electricity production from wind and Pv, securing electricity  supply at all times.  for the industry sector, hydrogen serves as an additional  renewable fuel option for high-temperature applications,  supplementing biomass in industrial processes, whenever  direct use of renewable electricity is not applicable. In the  Advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario, hydrogen totally  replaces the remaining gas demand by 2050.  The transport sector also increasingly relies on hydrogen as a  renewable fuel, where battery supported electric vehicles  reach their limitations and where limited biomass potentials  restrict the extension of biofuel use. However, future  application of hydrogen might not suffice to replace all fossil  fuel demand, especially in aviation, heavy duty vehicles and  navigation. Thus the new Energy [R]evolution study  introduces synthetic hydrocarbons from renewable hydrogen,  electricity and biogenic/atmospheric CO2. These synfuels are  introduced after 2030 in the Advanced Energy [R]evolution  scenario. They provide for the remaining fossil fuel demand  that cannot be supplied by biofuels due to limited potentials.    5.4.8 assumed growth rates in scenario development  Table 5.15 shows annual market volumes and growth rates  resulting from the scenarios which are used to cross-check  dynamics of deployment pathways.  74    5  table 5.15 | assumed average growth rates and annual market volumes by renewable technology  generation    5.4.9 assumptions for fossil fuel phase out  More than 80% of the current energy supply is based on  fossil fuels. Oil dominates the entire transport sector; oil and  gas make up the heating sector and coal is the most-used  fuel for power. Each sector has different renewable energy  and energy efficiency technologies combinations which  depend on the locally available resources, infrastructure and  to some extent, lifestyle.  In line with the overall targets, the Energy [R]evolution  scenarios need to map out a clear pathway to phase-out oil  in the short-term, coal in the mid-term and gas in the longterm.  Such a pathway was described in a study from the  German Institute “Ludwig bölkow System Technik” (LbST) for  the Energy [R]evolution 2012 edition. The institute did a  detailed analysis of the global conventional oil resources,  current infrastructure of those industries, the estimated  production capacities of existing oil wells and the investment  plans known by end 2011. Greenpeace asked LbST to  evaluate the remaining fossil fuel resources between 2012  and 2050 with no new deep sea and arctic oil exploration, no  oil shale and tar sand mining because of two reasons:  • first and foremost, to limit the carbon emission to save  the climate.  • Secondly, to outline a production scenario in which all  financial resources flow from 2012 onwards only in the  development of new and larger markets for renewable  energy technologies and energy efficiency to avoid  “locking-in” new fossil fuel infrastructure.  The following graphs show how fossil fuel resources can  phase out according to this analysis. This parameter, along  with the climate targets, is fundamental to the Energy  [R]evolution scenarios.  oil – production decline assumptions  figure 5.3 shows the remaining production capacities and the  additional production capacities assuming all new projects  planned for 2012 till 2020 will go ahead. Even with new  projects, the amount of remaining conventional oil is very  limited and therefore a transition towards a low oil demand  pattern is essential.  coal – production decline assumptions  While there is an urgent need for a transition away from oil  and gas to avoid “locking-in” investments in new production  wells, the climate is the clearly limiting factor for the coal  resource, not its availability( see figure 5.4). All existing coal  mines – even without any new expansion of mines – could  produce far more coal, but its burning puts the world on a  catastrophic climate change pathway.    5.5 review: greenpeace scenario projections  of the past  Greenpeace has published numerous projections in cooperation  with Renewable Industry Associations and scientific institutions  in the past decade. This section provides an overview of the  projections between 2000 and 2014 and compares them with  real market developments and projections of the IEA World  Energy Outlook – the basis for our reference scenario.  5.5.1 the development of the global wind industry  Greenpeace and the European Wind Energy Association  published “Windforce 10” for the first time in 1999 – a global  market projection for wind turbines until 2030. Since then, an  updated prognosis has been published every second year.  Since 2006 the report has been renamed into “Global Wind  Energy Outlook” with a new partner – the Global Wind Energy  Council (GWEC) – a new umbrella organisation of all regional  wind industry associations. figure 5.5 shows the projections  made each year between 2000 and 2012 compared to the real  market data. The graph also includes the first three Energy  [R]evolution (ER) editions (published in 2007, 2008 and 2010)  against the IEA´s wind projections published in World Energy  Outlook (WEO) 2000, 2002, 2005, 2008 and 2010.  The projections from the “Wind force 10” and “Windforce 12”  were calculated by bTM consultants, Denmark.    “Windforce 10” (2001 - 2011) exact projection for the global  wind market published during this time, at 10% below the  actual market development; also all following editions where  around 10% above or below the real market. from 2006  onwards, the new “Global Wind Energy Outlook” had two  different scenarios, a moderate and an advanced wind power  market projection calculated by GWEC and Greenpeace  International. The figures here show only the advanced  projections, as the moderate were too low. However, these  projections were the most criticised at the time, being called  “over ambitious” or even “impossible”.  In contrast, the IEA “Current Policies” projections seriously  underestimated the wind industry’s ability to increase  manufacturing capacity and reduce costs. In 2000, the IEA  WEO published projections of global installed capacity for  wind turbines of 32,500 MW for 2010. This capacity had been  connected to the grid by early 2003, only two-and-a-half  years later. In 2014, the annual global wind market was at  39,000 MW increasing the total cumulative capacity to  around 370,000 MW; around ten times more than the IEA’s  assumption a decade earlier.  Only time will tell if the GPI/DLR/GWEC longer-term  projections for the global wind industry will remain close to  the real market. However the IEA WEO projections over the  past decade have been constantly increased and keep  coming close to our progressive growth rates.    box 5.1 | article from meister consultants group  “renewable energy revolution” Published March 16, 201528  the energy world is undergoing massive transformation.  installations of renewable energy have skyrocketed around the  world, exceeding most predictions from less than a decade ago.  A record-breaking amount of wind and solar power was  installed globally in 2014, in what the uS Department of Energy  has characterized as an “energy revolution.” but how strong is  this momentum? How much have renewable technologies like  solar Pv and wind actually grown in recent years?  solar and wind: outpacing (most) expert projections.  Over the past 15 years, a number of predictions – by the  International Energy Agency, the uS Energy Information  Administration, and others – have been made about the  future of renewable energy growth. Almost every one of these  predictions has underestimated the scale of actual growth  experienced by the wind and solar markets.  Only the most aggressive growth projections, such as  Greenpeace’s Energy [R]evolution scenarios, have been close  to accurate.  Greenpeace’s projections have been predicated upon  drastic structural, policy, and business changes. The recent  moves seen by E.ON, China, and across countless other  local and global institutions suggest that these changes are  already underway.  what lies ahead?  No one knows what the future electricity mix will look like,  and that uncertainty is mirrored more broadly in projections  for the energy system as a whole. Approximately 13% of  global primary energy demand is derived from renewable  sources, and it is almost a certainty that renewables will  continue to expand. The question is: by how much?  Projections and scenarios range from 15% to 82% of global  primary energy demand by 2050.  To win in the future global marketplace, business leaders and  policymakers will need to manage change effectively. The  next phase in the renewable transformation will likely involve  substantial changes to the structure of the global energy  system. This means new policies, new business models, new  grid management systems and the potential for massive  disruption – all of which raise a number of questions:  • How can policymakers, businesses, and community  leaders work together to effectively manage the  transformation?  • How can leaders align stakeholder interests to implement  the right policies and regulations across regions?  • What new business models need to be deployed to deliver  greater levels of cost effective renewable and energy  efficiency projects?  • How can investors mobilize to finance major energy  infrastructure?  Strategic questions such as these are at the forefront of  energy discussions around the world. At the same time, they  presume that energy stakeholders will have some degree of  control over the changes that are coming. As has been seen  in the past, however, renewable energy market growth has  consistently surprised (on the upside) the analysts, planners,  and policymakers who have attempted to predict the future.    5.5.2 the development of the global solar  photovoltaic industry  Inspired by the successful work with the European Wind  Energy Association (EWEA), Greenpeace started to work with  the European Photovoltaic Industry Association to publish  “SolarGeneration 10” – a global market projection for solar  photovoltaic technology up to 2020 for the first time in 2001.  Since then, six editions have been published and EPIA and  Greenpeace constantly improved the calculation  methodology with experts from both organisations. figure 5.7  shows the actual projections for each year between 2001 and  2015 compared to the real market data, against the first two  Energy [R]evolution editions (published in 2007, 2008, 2010  and 2012) and the IEA´s solar projections published in World  Energy Outlook (WEO) 2000, 2002, 2005, 2007, 2009, 2010  and 2011. The IEA did not make specific projections for solar  photovoltaic in the first editions analysed in the research,  instead used the category “Solar/Tidal/Other”.  In contrast to the wind projections, all the SolarGeneration  projections have been too conservative. The total installed  capacity in 2014 was 175,000 MW more than twice as high  as projected in SolarGeneration 2 published a decade earlier.  Even SolarGeneration 5, published in 2008, underestimated  the possible market growth of photovoltaic in the advanced  scenario. In contrast, the IEA WEO 2000 estimations for 2010  were reached in 2004.    The long-term projections for solar photovoltaic are more  difficult than for wind because the costs have dropped  significantly faster than projected. for most OECD countries,  solar has reached grid parity with retail rates from utilities in  2014 and other solar technologies, such as concentrating  solar power plants (CSP), are also headed in that direction.  Therefore, future projections for solar photovoltaic do not just  depend on cost improvements, but also on available storage  technologies. Grid integration can actually be a bottle-neck  to solar that is now expected much earlier than estimated.  5.6 how does the energy [r]evolution scenario  compare to other scenarios?  The International Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) published a  ground-breaking new “Special Report on Renewables”  (SRREN) in May 2011. This report showed the latest and most  comprehensive analysis of scientific reports on all renewable  energy resources and global scientifically accepted energy  scenarios. The Energy [R]evolution was among three scenarios  chosen as an indicative scenario for an ambitious renewable  energy pathway. The following summarises the IPCC’s view.  four future pathways, from the following models were  assessed intensively:  • International Energy Agency World Energy Outlook 2009,  (IEA WEO 2009)  • Greenpeace Energy [R]evolution 2010, (ER 2010)  • (ReMIND-RECIPE)  • (MiniCam EMf 22)  The World Energy Outlook of the International Energy Agency was  used as an example baseline scenario (least amount of  development of renewable energy) and the other three treated as  “mitigation scenarios”, to address climate change risks. The four  scenarios provide substantial additional information on a number of  technical details, represent a range of underlying assumptions and  follow different methodologies. They provide different renewable  energy deployment paths, including Greenpeace’s “optimistic  application path for renewable energy assuming that the current  high dynamic (increase rates) in the sector can be maintained”.  The IPCC notes that scenario results are determined partly by  assumptions, but also might depend on the underlying  modelling architecture and model specific restrictions, so the  scenarios analysed use different modelling architectures,  demand projections and technology portfolios for the supply  side. The full results are provided in Table 5.16, but in summary:  • The IEA baseline has a high demand projection with low  renewable energy development.  • ReMind-RECIPE, MiniCam EMf 22 scenarios portrays a  high demand expectation and significant increase of  renewable energy is combined with the possibility to  employ CCS and nuclear.  • The ER 2010 relies on low demand (due to a significant  increase of energy efficiency) combined with high  renewable energy deployment, no CCS employment and a  global nuclear phase-out by 2045.  both population increase and GDP development are major  driving forces on future energy demand and therefore at least  indirectly determining the resulting shares of renewable  energy. The IPCC analysis shows which models use  assumptions based on outside inputs and what results are  generated from within the models. All scenarios take a 50%  increase of the global population into account on baseline  2009. Regards gross domestic product (GDP), all assume or  calculate a significant increase in terms of the GDP. The IEA  WEO 2009 and the ER 2010 model use forecasts of the  International Monetary fund (IMf 2009) and the Organisation  of Economic Co-Operation and Development (OECD) as  inputs to project GSP. The other two scenarios calculate GDP  from within their model. Table 5.16 provides an overview of  key parameter of the IPCC analysis and puts them in the  context of scenarios from IEA and Greenpeace which have  been published in the aftermath of the SRREN.    6.1 global scenario results  The development of future global energy demand is  determined by three key factors  • Population development: the number of people consuming  energy or using energy services.  • Economic development, for which Gross Domestic Product  (GDP) is the most commonly used indicator: in general an  increase in GDP triggers an increase in energy demand.  • Energy intensity: how much energy is required to produce a  unit of GDP.  The Reference scenario and the Energy [R]evolution scenarios  are based on the same projections of population and economic  development. The future development of energy intensity,  however, differs between the reference and the alternative  cases, taking into account the measures to increase energy  efficiency under both Energy [R]evolution scenarios.  6.1.1 projection of energy intensity  An increase in economic activity and a growing population  does not necessarily have to result in an equivalent increase  in energy demand. There is still a large potential for exploiting  energy efficiency measures. under the Reference scenario we  assume that energy intensity will be reduced by 1.85% on  average per year, leading to a reduction in final energy  demand per unit of GDP of about 51% between 2012 and  2050. under the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario it is  assumed that energy intensity decreases by 3.45 % while the  Advanced Energy [R]evolution achieves minus 3.55 % per  year due to active policy and technical support for energy  efficiency measures and will lead to an even higher reduction  in energy intensity of almost 75% until 2050.    6.1 world  6.1.2 final energy demand by sector  Combining the projections on population development, GDP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for World’s final energy demand. These are shown in  figure 6. for the Reference and Energy [R]evolution scenarios.  under the Reference scenario, total final energy demand  increases by 65% from the current 326,900 Pj/a to around  539,000 Pj/a in 2050. In the basic Energy [R]evolution  scenario, final energy demand decreases by 12% compared  to current consumption and is expected to reach 289,000  Pj/a by 2050. The Advanced scenario results in some  additional reductions due to a higher share of electric cars.  under both Energy [R]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.1.3). Total electricity demand will rise from about  18,860 TWh/a to 37,000 TWh/a by 2050 in the basic Energy  [R]evolution scenario. Compared to the Reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 16,700 TWh/a.  This reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. The transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the Advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to more  than 40,000 TWh/a. Electricity will become the major  renewable ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for various  purposes but also for the generation of synthetic fuels for  fossil fuels substitution. Around 8,100 TWh are used in 2050  for electric vehicles and rail transport in the Advanced  scenario, around 5,100 TWh for hydrogen and 3,600 TWh for  synthetic liquid fuel generation for the transport sector  (excluding bunkers).  Efficiency gains in the heating sector are even larger than in  the electricity sector. under the Energy [R]evolution  scenarios, consumption equivalent to about 76,000 Pj/a is  avoided through efficiency gains by 2050 compared to the  Reference scenario. As a result of energy-related renovation  of the existing stock of residential buildings, the introduction  of low energy standards and ‘passive climatisation’ for new  buildings, as well as highly efficient air conditioning systems,  enjoyment of the same comfort and energy services will be  accompanied with much lower future energy demand.    6.1.2 electricity generation  The development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. This  trend will more than compensate for the phasing out of  nuclear power production in the Energy [R]evolution  scenarios, continuously reducing the number of fossil fuel-fired  power plants as well. by 2050, 92% of the electricity  produced worldwide will come from renewable energy sources  in the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario. ‘New’ renewables –  mainly wind, Pv, CSP and geothermal energy – will contribute  68% to the total electricity generation. Already by 2020 the  share of renewable electricity production will be 31% and 58%  by 2030. The installed capacity of renewables will reach about  7,770 GW in 2030 and more than 17,000 GW by 2050.  A 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the Advanced scenario leads to around 23,600 GW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  Table 6.1.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies worldwide over time. up to 2020  wind and Pv will become the main contributors to the  growing market share. After 2020, the continuing growth of  wind and Pv will be complemented by electricity from solar  thermal, geothermal and ocean energy. The Energy  [R]evolution scenarios will lead to a high share of fluctuating  power generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of already  31% to 36% by 2030 and 53% to 55% by 2050. Therefore,  smart grids, demand side management (DSM), energy  storage capacities and other options need to be expanded in  order to increase the flexibility of the power system for grid  integration, load balancing and a secure supply of electricity.    87  6.1.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.1.7 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both Energy [R]evolution scenarios  increases the future costs of electricity generation compared  to the Reference scenario until 2030. This difference in full  cost of generation will be less than 0.2 uS$ct/kWh in both  Energy [R]evolution scenarios, without taking into account  integration costs for storage or other load-balancing  measures. because of increasing prices for conventional  fuels, electricity generation costs will become economically  favourable starting in 2030 under the Energy [R]evolution  scenarios. by 2050, the cost will be 2.5/1.7 uS$ct/kWh,  respectively, below those in the Reference case.  under the Reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total  electricity supply costs rising from today’s uS$ 2,063 billion  per year to more than uS$ 5,400 billion in 2050, compared to  uS$ 4,300 billion in the basic and uS$ 6,200 billion in the  Advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario. figure 6.1.7 shows  that both Energy [R]evolution scenarios not only comply with  World´s CO2 reduction targets, but also help stabilise energy  costs and relieve the economic pressure on society.  Increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term costs for electricity supply that  are more than 19% lower in the basic Energy [R]evolution  scenario than in the Reference scenario. The Advanced  scenario with 100% renewable power and an increase in  power generation of 35% results in supply costs 16% higher  than the Reference case.  6.1.4 future investments in the power sector  Around uS$ 48,000 billion is required in investment for the  Energy [R]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of  the plants) - approximately uS$ 1,233 billion per year, around  uS$ 23,500 billion more than in the Reference scenario  (uS$ 24,500 billion). Investments for the Advanced scenario  add up to uS$ 64,600 billion until 2050, on average  uS$ 1,656 billion per year, including high investments in  additional power plants for the production of synthetic fuels.  under the Reference scenario, the levels of investment in  conventional power plants add up to almost 50% while  approximately 50% would be invested in renewable energies  and cogeneration until 2050.  under the Energy [R]evolution scenarios, however, World  would shift almost 93%/94% of the entire investment towards  renewables and cogeneration, respectively. by 2030, the  fossil fuel share of power sector investment would be focused  mainly on gas power plants.  because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario reach a total  of more than uS$ 39,000 billion up to 2050, around uS$  1,000 billion per year. The total fuel cost savings therefore  would cover 170% of the total additional investments  compared to the Reference scenario. fuel cost savings in the  Advanced scenario are even higher and add up to uS$ 42,000  billion, or uS$ 1,080 billion per year. Renewable energy  sources would then go on to produce electricity without any  further fuel costs beyond 2050, while costs for coal and gas  will continue to be a burden on national economies.    6.1.5 energy supply for heating  Today, renewables meet around 21% of World’s energy  demand for heating, the main contribution coming from the  use of biomass. Dedicated support instruments are required  to ensure a dynamic development in particular for renewable  technologies for buildings and renewable process heat  production. In the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario,  renewables already provide 42% of World’s total heat  demand in 2030 and 86% in 2050.  • Energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating by 33% in 2050  (relative to the Reference scenario), in spite of improving  living standards and economic growth.  • In the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • A shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  CO2 emissions.  Table 6.1.2 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating worldwide over time. up to 2030  biomass remains the main contributor of the growing market  share. After 2030, the continuing growth of solar collectors  and a growing share of geothermal and environmental heat as  well as heat from renewable hydrogen will further reduce the  dependence on fossil fuels. The Advanced scenario results in  a complete substitution of the remaining gas consumption by  hydrogen generated from renewable electricity.    6.1.6 future investments in the heating sector  Also in the heating sector the Energy [R]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment strategies  in heating technologies. In particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped for  the heating sector. The use of biomass for heating purposes -  often traditional biomass today - will be substantially reduced  in the Energy [R]evolution scenarios and replaced by more  efficient and sustainable renewable heating technologies.  Renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to very  sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems. Thus,  it can only be roughly estimated that the Energy [R]evolution  scenario in total requires around uS$ 16,300 billion to be  invested in renewable heating technologies up to 2050  (including investments for replacement after the economic  lifetime of the plants) - approximately uS$ 420 billion per year.    * Excluding direct electric heating.  ref 2012-2050 e[r] 2012-2050 adv e[r] 2012-2050  The Advanced scenario assumes an even more ambitious  expansion of renewable technologies resulting in an average  investment of around uS$ 429 billion per year, while the main  strategy in the scenario is the substitution of the remaining  natural gas amounts with hydrogen or other synthetic fuels.  6.1.7 future employment in the energy sector  the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario results in more  energy sector jobs at every stage of the projection.  • There are 36.2 million energy sector jobs in the Advanced  Energy [R]evolution in 2020, and 30.1 million in the  Reference scenario.  • In 2025, there are 46.7 million jobs in the Advanced Energy  [R]evolution scenario, and 29.6 million in the Reference scenario.  • In 2030, there are 48 million jobs in the Advanced Energy  [R]evolution scenario and 28 million in the Reference scenario.  figure 6.1.11 shows the change in job numbers under all  scenarios for each technology between 2015 and 2030.  jobs in the coal sector decline in both the Reference scenario  and the Advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario, as a result of  productivity improvements in the industry, coupled with a move  away from coal in the Advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario.  In the Reference scenario jobs increase slightly to 2020, after  which energy sector jobs decline. This is mainly driven by  losses in the coal sector. At 2030, jobs are 3% (2.2 million)  below 2015 levels.  In the Advanced Energy [R]evolution scenario, strong growth  in the renewable sector leads to an increase of 26% in total  energy sector jobs by 2020, and job numbers are nearly 70%  above 2015 levels in 2025. job numbers continue to rise  after 2025, to reach 46.1 million by 2030.  Renewable energy accounts for 86% of energy jobs by 2030.  The greatest share are in biomass (25%), followed by solar Pv  and wind energy.    6.1.8 transport  A key target is to introduce incentives for people to drive  smaller cars and buy new, more efficient vehicle concepts. In  addition, it is vital to shift transport use to efficient modes like  rail, light rail and buses, especially in the expanding large  metropolitan areas. Along with rising prices for fossil fuels,  these changes reduce the further growth in car sales  projected under the Reference scenario. Due to population  increase, GDP growth and higher living standards, energy  demand from the transport sector is expected to increase in  the Reference scenario by around 65% to 1480,00 Pj/a in  2050. In the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario, efficiency  measures and modal shifts will save 53% (78,700 Pj/a) in  2050 compared to the Reference scenario.  Additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the Advanced scenario of 62%  (92,000 Pj/a) in 2050 compared to the Reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. by 2030, electricity will provide 9% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the Energy  [R]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 39% (14%/52% in  the Advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the transport  sector. In 2050, up to 14,000 Pj/a of hydrogen is used in the  transport sector for the Advanced Energy [R]evolution  scenario. A global maximum of 9,300 Pj/a of biofuels is used  in the basic Energy [R]evolution in 2050 while in the Advanced  case consumption is lower (around 8,000 Pj/a).    6.1.9 development of co2 emissions  Whilst World’s emissions of CO2 will increase by 56% between  2012 and 2050 under the Reference scenario, under the  Energy [R]evolution scenario they will decrease from 30,470  million tonnes in 2012 to 4,360 million tonnes in 2050. Annual  per capita emissions will drop from 4.3 tonne to 0.5 tonne. In  spite of the abstinence of nuclear power production and  increasing power demand, CO2 emissions will decrease in the  electricity sector. In the long run efficiency gains and the  increased use of renewable electricity in vehicles strongly  reduce emissions in the transport sector as well. With a 31%  share of CO2, the Industry sector will be the largest source of  emissions in 2050 in the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario. by  2050, World´s CO2 emissions are 80% below 1990 levels in the  Energy [R]evolution scenario while energy consumption is fully  decarbonised in the Advanced case.  6.1.10 primary energy consumption  Taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the Energy  [R]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.1.14. under the  basic Energy [R]evolution scenario, primary energy demand  will decrease by 19% from today’s 534,870 Pj/a to around  433,000 Pj/a (excluding non-energy consumption).  Compared to the Reference scenario, overall primary energy  demand will be reduced by 50% in 2050 under the Energy  [R]evolution scenario (Reference scenario: around 860,000  Pj in 2050). The Advanced scenario results due to additional  conversion losses in a primary energy consumption of around  450,000 Pj in 2050.  The Energy [R]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and  oil as fast as technically and economically possible by  expansion of renewable energies and a fast introduction of  very efficient vehicle concepts in the transport sector to  replace oil based combustion engines. This leads to an  overall renewable primary energy share of 33% in 2030 and  76% in 2050 in the basic Energy [R]evolution and of more  than 92% in 2050 in the Advanced case (incl. non-energy  consumption). In contrast to the Reference scenario, no new  nuclear power plants will be built worldwide in the Energy  [R]evolution scenarios.    6.2.1 final energy demand by sector  Combining the projections on population development, GDP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for OECD North America’s final energy demand.  These are shown in figure 6.2.1 for the Reference and Energy  [R]evolution scenarios. under the Reference scenario, total  final energy demand increases by 20% from the current  67,800 Pj/a to 81,600 Pj/a in 2050. In the basic Energy  [R]evolution scenario, final energy demand decreases by 45%  compared to current consumption and is expected to reach  37,300 Pj/a by 2050. The Advanced scenario results in some  additional reductions due to a higher share of electric cars.  under both Energy [R]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.2.2). Total electricity demand will rise from about  4,460 TWh/a to 4,610 TWh/a by 2050 in the basic Energy  [R]evolution scenario. Compared to the Reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 3,650 TWh/a.  6.2 oeCd north ameriCa  This reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. The transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the Advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to  5,000 TWh/a. Electricity will become the major renewable  ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for various purposes  but also for the generation of synthetic fuels for fossil fuels  substitution. Around 1,180 TWh are used in 2050 for electric  vehicles and rail transport in 2050 in the Advanced scenario,  around 900 TWh for hydrogen and 500 TWh for synthetic liquid  fuel generation for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  Efficiency gains in the heating sector are large as well. under  the Energy [R]evolution scenarios, consumption equivalent to  about 7,400 Pj/a is avoided through efficiency gains by 2050  compared to the Reference scenario. As a result of energy-related  renovation of the existing stock of residential  buildings, the introduction of low energy standards and  ‘passive climatisation’ for new buildings, as well as highly  efficient air conditioning systems, enjoyment of the same  comfort and energy services will be accompanied with much  lower future energy demand.    6.2.2 electricity generation  The development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. This  trend will more than compensate for the phasing out of  nuclear power production in the Energy [R]evolution  scenarios, continuously reducing the number of fossil fuel-fired  power plants as well. by 2050, 95% of the electricity  produced in OECD North America will come from renewable  energy sources in the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario.  ‘New’ renewables – mainly wind, Pv, CSP and geothermal  energy – will contribute 80% to the total electricity  generation. Already by 2020 the share of renewable electricity  production will be 32% and 66% by 2030. The installed  capacity of renewables will reach about 1,620 GW in 2030  and 2,350 GW by 2050.  A 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the Advanced scenario leads to around 3,100 GW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  Table 6.2.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies in OECD North America over time.  up to 2020 wind and Pv will become the main contributors to  the growing market share. After 2020, the continuing growth  of wind and Pv will be complemented by electricity from solar  thermal, geothermal and ocean energy. The Energy  [R]evolution scenarios will lead to a high share of fluctuating  power generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of already  41% to 47% by 2030 and 57% to 59% by 2050. Therefore,  smart grids, demand side management (DSM), energy  storage capacities and other options need to be expanded in  order to increase the flexibility of the power system for grid  integration, load balancing and a secure supply of electricity.    6.2.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.2.6 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both Energy [R]evolution scenarios increases  the future costs of electricity generation compared to the  Reference scenario until 2040. This difference in full cost of  generation will be less than 1.5 uS$ct/kWh in the basic Energy  [R]evolution and about 2.1 uS$ct/kWh in the Advanced scenario,  without taking into account integration costs for storage or other  load-balancing measures. because of increasing prices for  conventional fuels, electricity generation costs will become  economically favourable after 2040 under the Energy [R]evolution  scenario. by 2050, in the Energy [R]evolution the cost will be 0.5  uS$ct/kWh below and in the Advanced scenario 0.4 uS$ct/kWh  above those in the Reference case.  under the Reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total electricity  supply costs rising from today’s uS$ 303 billion per year to more  than uS$ 645 billion in 2050, compared to  uS$ 583 billion in the basic and uS$ 808 billion in the Advanced  Energy [R]evolution scenario. figure 6.2.6 shows that both  Energy [R]evolution scenarios not only comply with OECD North  America’s CO2 reduction targets, but also help stabilise energy  costs and relieve the economic pressure on society.  Increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term costs for electricity supply that  are more than 10% lower in the basic Energy [R]evolution  scenario than in the Reference scenario. The Advanced  scenario with 100% renewable power in supply costs 25%  higher than the Reference case, but a reduction of CO2  intensity to zero.  6.2.4 future investments in the power sector  Around uS$ 8,300 billion is required in investment for the  Energy [R]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of the  plants) - approximately uS$ 213 billion per year, uS$ 4,020  billion more than in the Reference scenario (uS$ 4,280 billion).  Investments for the Advanced scenario sum up to uS$ 10,620  billion until 2050, on average uS$ 272 billion per year,  including high investments for additional power plants for the  production of synthetic fuels. under the Reference scenario,  the levels of investment in conventional power plants add up  to almost 57% while approximately 43% would be invested in  renewable energies and cogeneration until 2050.  under the Energy [R]evolution scenarios, however, OECD  North America would shift almost 90%/91% of the entire  investment towards renewables and cogeneration,  respectively. by 2030, the fossil fuel share of power sector  investment would be focused mainly on gas power plants.  because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic Energy [R]evolution scenario reach a total  of uS$ 4,390 billion up to 2050, uS$ 113 billion per year. The  total fuel cost savings therefore would cover 110% of the  total additional investments compared to the Reference  scenario. fuel cost savings in the Advanced scenario are  even higher and add up to uS$ 4,680 billion, or uS$ 120  billion per year. Renewable energy sources would then go on  to produce electricity without any further fuel costs beyond  2050, while costs for coal and gas will continue to be a  burden on national economies.    6.2.5 energy supply for heating  Today, renewables meet around 11% of OECD North  America’s energy demand for heating, the main contribution  coming from the use of biomass. Dedicated support  instruments are required to ensure a dynamic development in  particular for renewable technologies for buildings and  renewable process heat production. In the basic Energy  [R]evolution scenario, renewables already provide 39% of  OECD North America’s total heat demand in 2030 and 89% in  2050.  • The efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating by 29 % in 2050  (relative to the Reference scenario), in spite of improving  living standards and economic growth.  • In the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • A shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  CO2 emissions.  Table 6.2.2 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating in OECD North America over time.  up to 2030 biomass remains the main contributor of the  growing market share. After 2030, the continuing growth of  solar collectors and a growing share of geothermal and  environmental heat as well as heat from renewable hydrogen  will further reduce the dependence on fossil fuels. The  Advanced scenario results in a complete substitution of the  remaining gas consumption by hydrogen generated from  renewable electricity.    6.2.6 future investments in the heating sector  Also in the heating sector the Energy [R]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment  strategies in heating technologies. In particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped  for the heating sector. The use of biomass for heating  purposes - often traditional biomass today - will be  substantially reduced in the Energy [R]evolution scenarios  and replaced by more efficient and sustainable renewable  heating technologies.  Renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to  very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems.  Thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the Energy  [R]evolution scenario in total requires around  uS$ 3,550 billion to be invested in renewable heating  technologies up to 2050 (including investments for  replacement after the economic lifetime of the plants) -  approximately uS$ 91 billion per year. The Advanced  scenario assumes the same ambitious expansion of  renewable technologies, while the main strategy in the  scenario is the substitution of the remaining natural gas  amounts with hydrogen or other synthetic fuels.    6.2.8 transport  a key target in oecd north america is to introduce incentives  for people to drive smaller cars and buy new, more efficient  vehicle concepts. in addition, it is vital to shift transport use  to efficient modes like rail, light rail and buses, especially in  the large metropolitan areas. along with rising prices for fossil  fuels, these changes reduce the further growth in car sales  projected under the reference scenario. due to population  increase, gdP growth and higher living standards, energy  demand from the transport sector is expected to slightly  increase in the reference scenario by around 7% to 31,710  PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  efficiency measures and modal shifts will save 65% (20,630  PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the advanced scenario of 72%  (22,700 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. By 2030, electricity will provide 11% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the energy  [r]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 35% (47% in the  advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the  transport sector. in 2050, up to 2,500 PJ/a of hydrogen is  used in the transport sector for the advanced energy    6.2.10 development of co2 emissions  Whilst oecd north america’s emissions of co2 will increase  by 6% between 2012 and 2050 under the reference scenario,  under the energy [r]evolution scenario they will decrease from  5,950 million tonnes in 2012 to 397 million tonnes in 2050.  annual per capita emissions will drop from 12.5 tonne to 0.7  tonne. in spite of the abstinence of nuclear power production  and increasing power demand, co2 emissions will decrease in  the electricity sector. in the long run efficiency gains and the  increased use of renewable electricity in vehicles strongly  reduce emissions in the transport sector as well.  With a 40% share of co2, the transport sector will be the  largest source of emissions in 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. By 2050, oecd north america’s co2  emissions are around 90% below 1990 levels in the energy  [r]evolution scenario while energy consumption is fully  decarbonised in the advanced case.  6.2.11 primary energy consumption  taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the energy  [r]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.2.12. Under the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario, primary energy demand  will decrease by 46% from today’s 107,520 PJ/a to around  58,000 PJ/a. compared to the reference scenario, overall  primary energy demand will be reduced by 54% in 2050 under  the energy [r]evolution scenario (reference scanario: around  126,000 PJ in 2050). the advanced energy [r]evolution  scenario results due to additional conversion losses in a  primary energy consumption of around 61,100 PJ in 2050.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and oil  as fast as technically and economically possible by expansion of  renewable energies and a fast introduction of very efficient  vehicle concepts in the transport sector to replace oil based  combustion engines. this leads to an overall renewable primary  energy share of 34% in 2030 and 80% in 2050 in the basic  energy [r]evolution and of more than 92% in 2050 in the  advanced case (incl. non-energy consumption). in contrast to the  reference scenario, no new nuclear power plants will be built in  oecd north america in the energy [r]evolution scenarios.  102    6.3.1 final energy demand by sector  combining the projections on population development, gdP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for latin america’s final energy demand. these are  shown in figure 6.3.1 for the reference and energy  [r]evolution scenarios. Under the reference scenario, total  final energy demand increases by 91% from the current  19,000 PJ/a to 36,300 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario, final energy demand decreases by 6%  compared to current consumption and is expected to reach  17,900 PJ/a by 2050. the advanced scenario results in some  additional reductions due to a higher share of electric cars.  Under both energy [r]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.3.2). total electricity demand will rise from about  990 tWh/a to 2,230 tWh/a by 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. compared to the reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 840 tWh/a.  6.3 latin america  this reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. the transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to  2,500 tWh/a. electricity will become the major renewable  ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for various purposes  but also for the generation of synthetic fuels for fossil fuels  substitution. around 600 tWh are used in 2050 for electric  vehicles and rail transport in 2050 in the advanced scenario,  around 430 tWh for hydrogen and 90 tWh for synthetic liquid  fuel generation for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  efficiency gains in the heating sector are even larger than in  the electricity sector. Under the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, consumption equivalent to about 6,900 PJ/a is  avoided through efficiency gains by 2050 compared to the  reference scenario. as a result of energy-related renovation  of the existing stock of residential buildings, the introduction  of low energy standards and ‘passive climatisation’ for new  buildings, as well as highly efficient air conditioning systems,  enjoyment of the same comfort and energy services will be  accompanied by much lower future energy demand.    6.3.2 electricity generation  the development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. this  trend will more than compensate for the phasing out of  nuclear power production in the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, continuously reducing the number of fossil fuelfired  power plants as well. By 2050, 94% of the electricity  produced in latin america will come from renewable energy  sources in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario. ‘new’  renewables – mainly wind, Pv, csP and geothermal energy –  will contribute 50% to the total electricity generation. already  by 2020 the share of renewable electricity production will be  71% and 84% by 2030. the installed capacity of renewables  will reach about 440 gW in 2030 and 930 gW by 2050.  a 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the advanced scenario leads to around 1,230 gW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  table 6.3.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies in latin america over time. Until 2040  hydro will remain the main renewable power source. By 2020  wind and Pv overtake biomass, currently the second largest  contributor to the growing renewable market. after 2020, the  continuing growth of wind and Pv will be complemented by  electricity from solar thermal, geothermal and ocean energy.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios will lead to a high share of  fluctuating power generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of  already 25% to 33% by 2030 and 41% to 49% by 2050.  therefore, smart grids, demand side management (dsm),  energy storage capacities and other options need to be  expanded in order to increase the flexibility of the power  system for grid integration, load balancing and a secure  supply of electricity.    6.3.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.3.6 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both energy [r]evolution scenarios  increases the future costs of electricity generation compared to  the reference scenario before 2030. this difference in full cost  of generation will be less than 0.2 Us$ct/kWh in the basic  energy [r]evolution scenario and slightly more than  0.2 Us$ct/kWh in the advanced scenario, without taking into  account integration costs for storage or other load-balancing  measures. Because of increasing prices for conventional fuels,  electricity generation costs will become economically  favourable starting in 2030 under the energy [r]evolution  scenarios. By 2050, the cost will be 1.8 Us$ct/kWh below  those in the reference case.  Under the reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total  electricity supply costs rising from today’s Us$ 87 billion per  year to more than Us$ 279 billion in 2050, compared to Us$  270 billion in the basic and Us$ 331 billion in the advanced  energy [r]evolution scenario. figure 6.3.6 shows that both  energy [r]evolution scenarios not only comply with latin  america´s co2 reduction targets, but also help stabilise  energy costs and relieve the economic pressure on society.  increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term costs for electricity supply that  are 3% lower in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario than in  the reference scenario despite a 7% increase in electricity  production. the advanced scenario with 100% renewable  power and an increase in power generation of 36% results in  supply costs 19% higher than the reference case.  6.3.4 future investments in the power sector  around Us$ 2,600 billion is required in investment for the  energy [r]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of  the plants) - approximately Us$ 67 billion per year, Us$ 1,200  billion more than in the reference scenario (Us$ 1,400  billion). investments for the advanced scenario sum up to  Us$ 3,390 billion until 2050, on average Us$ 87 billion per  year. Under the reference scenario, the levels of investment  in conventional power plants add up to almost 24% while  approximately 76% would be invested in renewable energies  and cogeneration until 2050.  Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios, however, latin  america would shift almost 94%/97% of the entire investment  towards renewables and cogeneration, respectively. By 2030,  the fossil fuel share of power sector investment would be  focused mainly on gas power plants.  Because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario reach a total  of Us$ 1,880 billion up to 2050, Us$ 48 billion per year. the  total fuel cost savings therefore would cover 160% of the  total additional investments compared to the reference  scenario. fuel cost savings in the advanced scenario are  even higher and add up to Us$ 2,040 billion, or Us$ 52 billion  per year. renewable energy sources would then go on to  produce electricity without any further fuel costs beyond  2050, while costs for coal and gas will continue to be a  burden on national economies.    6.3.5 energy supply for heating  today, renewables meet around 39% of latin america’s  energy demand for heating, the main contribution coming  from the use of biomass. dedicated support instruments are  required to ensure a dynamic development in particular for  renewable technologies for buildings and renewable process  heat production. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  renewables already provide 63% of latin america’s total heat  demand in 2030 and 93% in 2050.  • energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating by 43 % in 2050  (relative to the reference scenario), in spite of improving  living standards and economic growth.  • in the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • a shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  co2 emissions.  table 6.3.2 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating in latin america over time. although  biomass remains the main contributor, its market share is  decrasing and with it unefficient traditional biomass. after  2030, the continuing growth of solar collectors and a growing  share of geothermal and environmental heat as well as heat  from renewable hydrogen will further reduce the dependence  on fossil fuels. the advanced scenario results in a complete  substitution of the remaining gas consumption by hydrogen  generated from renewable electricity.    6.3.6 future investments in the heating sector  also in the heating sector the energy [r]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment  strategies in heating technologies. in particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped  for the heating sector. the use of biomass for heating  purposes - often traditional biomass today - will be  substantially reduced in the energy [r]evolution scenarios  and replaced by more efficient and sustainable renewable  heating technologies.  renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to  very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems.  thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the energy  [r]evolution scenario in total requires around Us$ 580 billion  to be invested in renewable heating technologies up to 2050  (including investments for replacement after the economic  lifetime of the plants) - approximately Us$ 15 billion per year.  the advanced scenario assumes an equally ambitious  expansion of renewable technologies resulting in an average  investment of around Us$ 15 billion per year, while the main  strategy in the scenario is the substitution of the remaining  natural gas amounts with electricity, hydrogen or other  synthetic fuels.    6.3.8 transport  a key target in latin america is to introduce incentives for  people to drive smaller cars and buy new, more efficient  vehicle concepts. in addition, it is vital to shift transport use  to efficient modes like rail, light rail and buses, especially in  the expanding large metropolitan areas. along with rising  prices for fossil fuels, these changes reduce the further  growth in car sales projected under the reference scenario.  due to population increase, gdP growth and higher living  standards, energy demand from the transport sector is  expected to increase in the reference scenario by around  61% to 11,030 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy [r]evolution  scenario, efficiency measures and modal shifts will save 47%  (5,150 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the advanced scenario of 57%  (6,290 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. By 2030, electricity will provide 6% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the energy  [r]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 31% (46% in the  advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the  transport sector. in 2050, up to 1,180 PJ/a of hydrogen is  used in the transport sector for the advanced energy    6.3.10 development of co2 emissions  Whilst latin america’s emissions of co2 will increase by 78%  between 2012 and 2050 under the reference scenario, under  the energy [r]evolution scenario they will decrease from  1,230 million tonnes in 2012 to 138 million tonnes in 2050.  annual per capita emissions will drop from 2.5 tonne to 0.2  tonne. in spite of the abstinence of nuclear power production  and increasing power demand, co2 emissions will decrease  in the electricity sector. in the long run efficiency gains and  the increased use of renewable electricity in vehicles strongly  reduce emissions in the transport sector as well.  With a 39% share of co2, the transport sector will be the  largest source of emissions in 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. By 2050, latin america’s co2  emissions are around 76% below 1990 levels in the energy  [r]evolution scenario while energy consumption is fully  decarbonised in the advanced case.  6.3.11 primary energy consumption  taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the energy  [r]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.3.12. Under the basic  energy [r]evolution scenario, primary energy demand increases  slightly from today’s 27,120 PJ/a and starts to decrease after  2020 to again around 27,000 PJ/a in 2050. compared to the  reference scenario, overall primary energy demand will be  reduced by 44% in 2050 under the energy [r]evolution] scenario  (reference scenario: around 49,000 PJ in 2050). the advanced  scenario results due to additional conversion losses in a primary  energy consumption of around 28,700 PJ in 2050.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and  oil as fast as technically and economically possible by  expansion of renewable energies and a fast introduction of very  efficient vehicle concepts in the transport sector to replace oil  based combustion engines. this leads to an overall renewable  primary energy share of 52% in 2030 and 86% in 2050 in the  basic energy [r]evolution and of more than 95% in 2050 in the  advanced case (incl. non-energy consumption). in contrast to  the reference scenario, no new nuclear power plants will be  built in latin america in the energy [r]evolution scenarios.    6.4.1 final energy demand by sector  combining the projections on population development, gdP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for oecd europe’s final energy demand. these are  shown in figure 6.4.1 for the reference and energy  [r]evolution scenarios. Under the reference scenario, total  final energy demand increases by 15% from the current  46,600 PJ/a to 53,500 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario, final energy demand decreases by 36%  compared to current consumption and is expected to reach  29,800 PJ/a by 2050. the advanced scenario results in some  additional reductions due to a higher share of electric cars.  Under both energy [r]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.4.2). total electricity demand will rise from about  3,070 tWh/a to 3,420 tWh/a by 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. compared to the reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 1,700 tWh/a.  6.4 oecd europe  this reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. the transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to  3,900 tWh/a. electricity will become the major renewable  ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for various purposes  but also for the generation of synthetic fuels for fossil fuels  substitution. around 710 tWh are used in 2050 for electric  vehicles and rail transport in 2050 in the advanced scenario,  around 580 tWh for hydrogen and 210 tWh for synthetic liquid  fuel generation for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  efficiency gains in the heating sector are even larger than in  the electricity sector. Under the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, consumption equivalent to about 8,800 PJ/a is  avoided through efficiency gains by 2050 compared to the  reference scenario. as a result of energy-related renovation  of the existing stock of residential buildings, the introduction  of low energy standards and ‘passive climatisation’ for new  buildings, as well as highly efficient air conditioning systems,  enjoyment of the same comfort and energy services will be  accompanied with much lower future energy demand.    6.4.2 electricity generation  the development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. this  trend will more than compensate for the phasing out of  nuclear power production in the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, continuously reducing the number of fossil fuel-fired  power plants as well. By 2050, 94% of the electricity  produced in oecd europe will come from renewable energy  sources in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario. ‘new’  renewables – mainly wind, Pv, csP and geothermal energy –  will contribute 64% to the total electricity generation. already  by 2020 the share of renewable electricity production will be  42% and 66% by 2030. the installed capacity of renewables  will reach about 1,050 gW in 2030 and 1,660 gW by 2050.  a 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the advanced scenario leads to around 2,280 gW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  table 6.4.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies in oecd europe over time. Up to  2020 wind and Pv will become the main contributors to the  growing market share. after 2020, the continuing growth of  wind and Pv will be complemented by electricity from solar  thermal, geothermal and ocean energy. the energy  [r]evolution scenarios will lead to a high share of fluctuating  power generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of already  35% to 38% by 2030 and 56% to 62% by 2050. therefore,  smart grids, demand side management (dsm), energy  storage capacities and other options need to be expanded in  order to increase the flexibility of the power system for grid  integration, load balancing and a secure supply of electricity.  116    6.4.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.4.6 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both energy [r]evolution scenarios  increases the future costs of electricity generation compared  to the reference scenario until 2030. this difference in full  cost of generation will be less than 0.8 Us$ct/kWh in the  basic energy [r]evolution and about 1 Us$ct/kWh in the  advanced scenario, without taking into account integration  costs for storage or other load-balancing measures. Because  of increasing prices for conventional fuels, electricity  generation costs will become economically favourable  starting in 2040 under the energy [r]evolution scenario.  By 2050, the cost will be 1.1 Us$ct/kWh below and in the  advanced scenario equal to those in the reference case.  Under the reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total  electricity supply costs rising from today’s Us$ 290 billion per  year to more than Us$ 538 billion in 2050, compared to  Us$ 427 billion in the basic and Us$ 601 billion in the  advanced energy [r]evolution scenario. figure 6.4.6 shows  that the energy [r]evolution scenario not only complys with  oecd europe´s co2 reduction targets, but also helps stabilise  energy costs and relieve the economic pressure on society.  increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term costs for electricity supply that  are more than 21% lower in the basic energy [r]evolution  scenario than in the reference scenario. the advanced  scenario with 100% renewable power and an increase in  power generation of 12% results in supply costs 12% higher  than the reference case.  6.4.4 future investments in the power sector  around Us$ 5,430 billion is required in investment for the  energy [r]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of the  plants) - approximately Us$ 139 billion per year, Us$ 1,730  billion more than in the reference scenario (Us$ 3,700 billion).  investments for the advanced scenario add up to Us$ 6,720  billion until 2050, on average Us$ 172 billion per year,  including high investments in additional power plants for the  production of synthetic fuels. Under the reference scenario,  the levels of investment in conventional power plants add up  to almost 30% while approximately 70% would be invested in  renewable energies and cogeneration until 2050.  Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios, however, oecd  europe would shift almost 93%/94% of the entire investment  towards renewables and cogeneration, respectively. By 2030,  the fossil fuel share of power sector investment would be  focused mainly on gas power plants.  Because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario reach a total  of Us$ 3,610 billion up to 2050, Us$ 93 billion per year. the  total fuel cost savings therefore would cover 210% of the  total additional investments compared to the reference  scenario. fuel cost savings in the advanced scenario are  even higher and add up to Us$ 3,780 billion, or Us$ 97 billion  per year. renewable energy sources would then go on to  produce electricity without any further fuel costs beyond  2050, while costs for coal and gas will continue to be a  burden on national economies.    6.4.5 energy supply for heating  today, renewables meet around 16% of oecd europe’s  energy demand for heating, the main contribution coming  from the use of biomass. dedicated support instruments are  required to ensure a dynamic development in particular for  renewable technologies for buildings and renewable process  heat production. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  renewables already provide 45% of oecd europe’s total heat  demand in 2030 and 86% in 2050.  • energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating by 33% in 2050  (relative to the reference scenario), in spite of improving  living standards and economic growth.  • in the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • a shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  co2 emissions.  table 6.4.2 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating in oecd europe over time. Up to  2030 biomass remains the main contributor of the growing  market share. after 2030, the continuing growth of solar  collectors and a growing share of geothermal and  environmental heat as well as heat from renewable hydrogen  will further reduce the dependence on fossil fuels. the  advanced scenario results in a complete substitution of the  remaining gas consumption by hydrogen generated from  renewable electricity.  118    6  figure 6.4.8 | oecd europe: projection of heat supply by energy carrier – reference, energy [r]evolution,  advanced energy [r]evolution scenarios  0  5,000  10,000  15,000  20,000  25,000  30,000  PJ/a  2012 2020 2025 2030 2040 2050  REF E[R] ADV REF E[R] REF E[R] REF E[R] REF E[R] REF E[R]  E[R]  ADV  E[R]  ADV  E[R]  ADV  E[R]  ADV  E[R]  ADV  E[R]  FOSSIL  BIOMASS  SOLAR HEATING  GEOTHERMAL HEATING  & HEAT PUMPS  ELECTRIC HEATING  HYDROGEN  EFFICIENCY  table 6.4.2 | oecd europe: projection of renewable  heat supply under the reference and both energy  [r]evolution scenarios in pj/a  2012 2020 2030 2040 2050  Biomass ref 2,387 2,908 3,441 4,007 4,717  e[r] 2,387 2,937 3,712 3,770 3,874  adv 2,387 2,937 3,712 3,770 3,940  solar Heating ref 107 211 351 500 685  e[r] 107 362 1,816 3,061 3,811  adv 107 362 1,816 3,209 4,016  geotHermal Heat ref 179 258 344 467 620  and Heat PUmPs e[r] 179 487 1,870 4,018 5,080  adv 179 487 1,870 4,108 5,301  Hydrogen ref 0 0 0 0 0  e[r] 0 0 3 132 627  adv 0 0 174 756 2,283  total ref 2,673 3,377 4,135 4,974 6,022  e[r] 2,673 3,785 7,401 10,981 13,393  adv 2,673 3,785 7,572 11,842 15,540  119  6.4.6 future investments in the heating sector  also in the heating sector the energy [r]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment  strategies in heating technologies. in particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped  for the heating sector. the use of biomass for heating  purposes - often traditional biomass today - will be  substantially reduced in the energy [r]evolution scenarios  and replaced by more efficient and sustainable renewable  heating technologies.  renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to  very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems.  thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the energy  [r]evolution scenario in total requires around  Us$ 2,820 billion to be invested in renewable heating  technologies up to 2050 (including investments for  replacement after the economic lifetime of the plants) -  approximately Us$ 72 billion per year. the advanced  scenario assumes an even more ambitious expansion of  renewable technologies resulting in an average investment of  around Us$ 76 billion per year, while the main strategy in the  scenario is the substitution of the remaining natural gas  amounts with hydrogen or other synthetic fuels.  6  figure 6.4.9 | oecd europe: development of investments for renewable heat generation technologies –  reference, energy [r]evolution, advanced energy [r]evolution scenarios  energy  [r]evolution  table 6.4.3 | oecd europe: installed capacities for  renewable heat generation under the scenarios in gw  2012 2020 2030 2040 2050  Biomass ref 419 479 530 588 645  e[r] 419 448 417 372 322  adv 419 448 417 372 322  geotHermal ref 2 3 5 8 9  e[r] 2 5 37 77 85  adv 2 5 37 77 100  solar Heating ref 32 63 104 148 202  e[r] 32 109 517 836 1,021  adv 32 109 517 881 1,087  Heat PUmPs ref 30 42 56 75 101  e[r] 30 74 245 478 611  adv 30 74 245 492 631  total* ref 482 588 695 819 957  e[r] 482 636 1,216 1,763 2,039  adv 482 636 1,216 1,822 2,140  BIOMASS, 53%  HEAT PUMPS, 21%  SOLAR, 24%  GEOTHERMAL, 2%  TOTAL  990 BILLION USD  BIOMASS, 4%  HEAT PUMPS, 48%  SOLAR, 43%  GEOTHERMAL, 5%  TOTAL  2,820 BILLION USD  BIOMASS, 4%  HEAT PUMPS, 46%  SOLAR, 43%  GEOTHERMAL, 7%  TOTAL  2,965 BILLION USD  * excluding direct electric heating.  ref 2012-2050 e[r] 2012-2050 adv e[r] 2012-2050  6.4.7 future employment in the energy sector  the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario results in more  energy sector jobs in oecd europe at every stage of  the projection.  • there are 2 million energy sector jobs in the advanced  energy [r]evolution in 2020, and 1.1 million in the  reference scenario.  • in 2025, there are 2.8 million jobs in the advanced energy  [r]evolution scenario, and 1.1 million in the reference scenario.  • in 2030, there are 2.7 million jobs in the advanced energy  [r]evolution scenario and 1.1 million in the reference scenario.  figure 6.4.10 shows the change in job numbers under both  scenarios for each technology between 2015 and 2030. Jobs in  the coal sector decline in both scenarios, and there is an overall  decline of 12% in energy sector jobs in the reference scenario.  strong growth in renewable energy leads to an increase of  62% in total energy sector jobs in the advanced energy  [r]evolution scenario by 2020. Jobs continue to rise, and are  more than double 2015 levels in both 2025 and 2030.  renewable energy accounts for 86% of energy jobs by 2030,  with solar heating having the greatest share (20%), followed  by solar Pv, wind, and biomass.  120    6  table 6.4.4 | oecd europe: total employment in the energy sector in thousand jobs  figure 6.4.10 | oecd europe: employment in the  energy sector under the reference and advanced  energy [r]evolution scenarios  0  0.5  1.0  1.5  2.0  2.5  3.0  Direct jobs - Millions  2015 2020 2025 2030 2020 2025 2030  OCEAN  SOLAR THERMAL POWER  GEOTHERMAL POWER  PV  BIOMASS  NUCLEAR  GAS, OIL & DIESEL  COAL  SOLAR - HEAT HYDRO  GEOTHERMAL & HEAT PUMP WIND  REF ADV E[R]  reference advanced energy [r]evolution  2015 2020 2025 2030 2020 2025 2030  jobs by fuel  coal 294 253 228 209 246 177 135  gas, oil & diesel 152 153 149 139 140 143 134  nUclear 84 82 81 80 96 101 110  reneWaBles 725 631 662 654 1,547 2,330 2,363  total jobs 1,255 1,120 1,121 1,083 2,029 2,751 2,742  jobs by sector  constrUction and installation 203 125 142 135 560 1,001 934  manUfactUring 144 92 92 76 508 725 732  oPerations and maintenance 380 402 405 407 443 535 623  fUel sUPPly (domestic) 528 501 483 465 518 489 453  coal and gas exPort - - - - - - -  total jobs 1,255 1,120 1,121 1,083 2,029 2,751 2,742  121  6.4.8 transport  a key target in oecd europe is to introduce incentives for  people to drive smaller cars and buy new, more efficient  vehicle concepts. in addition, it is vital to shift transport use  to efficient modes like rail, light rail and buses, especially in  the metropolitan areas. along with rising prices for fossil  fuels, these changes reduce the further growth in car sales  projected under the reference scenario. due to population  increase, gdP growth and higher living standards, energy  demand from the transport sector is expected to only slightly  decrease in the reference scenario by around 6% to 12,700  PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  efficiency measures and modal shifts will save 53% (6,700  PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the advanced scenario of 60%  (7,670 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. By 2030, electricity will provide 11% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the energy  [r]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 40% (51% in the  advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the  transport sector. in 2050, more than 1,610 PJ/a of hydrogen  is used in the transport sector for the advanced energy  [r]evolution scenario.  6  energy  [r]evolution  table 6.4.5 | oecd europe: projection of transport  energy demand by mode in the reference and the  energy [r]evolution scenarios in pj/a  2012 2020 2030 2040 2050  rail ref 387 401 417 430 442  e[r] 387 407 417 434 446  adv 387 422 570 743 866  road ref 12,527 12,572 12,557 11,937 11,328  e[r] 12,527 11,069 8,157 5,690 4,925  adv 12,527 10,985 7,451 4,494 3,617  domestic aviation ref 262 400 491 507 518  e[r] 262 380 410 390 370  adv 262 376 385 339 296  domestic ref 238 300 331 338 341  navigation e[r] 238 290 265 247 240  adv 238 290 265 247 240  total ref 13,414 13,673 13,796 13,213 12,629  e[r] 13,414 12,146 9,249 6,761 5,980  adv 13,414 12,074 8,671 5,823 5,019  figure 6.4.11 | oecd europe: final energy consumption in transport under the scenarios  0  2,000  4,000  6,000  8,000  10,000  12,000  14,000  16,000  PJ/a  2012 2020 2025 2030 2040 2050  REF E[R] ADV REF E[R] REF E[R] REF E[R] REF E[R] REF E[R]  E[R]  ADV  E[R]  ADV  E[R]  ADV  E[R]  ADV  E[R]  ADV  E[R]  OIL PRODUCTS  NATURAL GAS  BIOFUELS  SYNFUELS  ELECTRICITY  HYDROGEN  EFFICIENCY  6.4.10 development of co2 emissions  Whilst oecd europe’s emissions of co2 will decrease by 10%  between 2012 and 2050 under the reference scenario, under  the energy [r]evolution scenario they will decrease from 3,720  million tonnes in 2012 to 329 million tonnes in 2050. annual  per capita emissions will drop from 6.6 tonne to  0.5 tonne. in spite of the abstinence of nuclear power  production and increasing power demand, co2 emissions will  decrease in the electricity sector. in the long run efficiency  gains and the increased use of renewable electricity in vehicles  strongly reduce emissions in the transport sector as well.  With a 31% share of co2, the industry sector will be the  largest source of emissions in 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. By 2050, oecd europe´s co2  emissions are around 92% below 1990 levels in the energy  [r]evolution scenario while energy consumption is fully  decarbonised in the advanced case.  6.4.11 primary energy consumption  taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the energy  [r]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.4.12. Under the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario, primary energy demand will  decrease by 44% from today’s 72,960 PJ/a to around 41,000  PJ/a. compared to the reference scenario, overall primary  energy demand will be reduced by 46% in 2050 under the  energy [r]evolution scenario (reference scenario: around  76,000 PJ in 2050). the advanced scenario results due to  additional conversion losses in a primary energy consumption  of around 42,400 PJ in 2050.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and oil  as fast as technically and economically possible by expansion  of renewable energies and a fast introduction of very efficient  vehicle concepts in the transport sector to replace oil based  combustion engines. this leads to an overall renewable primary  energy share of 37% in 2030 and 79% in 2050 in the basic  energy [r]evolution and of more than 92% in 2050 in the  advanced case (incl. non-energy consumption). in contrast to  the reference scenario, no new nuclear power plants will be  built in oecd europe in the energy [r]evolution scenarios.  122    6.5.1 final energy demand by sector  combining the projections on population development, gdP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for africa’s final energy demand. these are shown in  figure 6.5.1 for the reference and energy [r]evolution  scenarios. Under the reference scenario, total final energy  demand increases by 111% from the current 21,700 PJ/a to  45,700 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  final energy demand increases at a much lower rate by 26%  compared to current consumption and is expected to reach  27,300 PJ/a by 2050. the advanced scenario results in some  additional reductions due to a higher share of electric cars.  Under both energy [r]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.5.2). total electricity demand will rise from about 590  tWh/a to 2,890 tWh/a by 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. compared to the reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 360 tWh/a.  6.5 africa  this reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. the transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to 3,100  tWh/a. electricity will become the major renewable ‘primary’  energy, not only for direct use for various purposes but also for  the generation of synthetic fuels for fossil fuels substitution.  around 490 tWh are used in 2050 for electric vehicles and rail  transport in 2050 in the advanced scenario, around 560 tWh  for hydrogen and 790 tWh for synthetic liquid fuel generation  for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  efficiency gains in the heating sector are even larger than in the  electricity sector. Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios,  consumption equivalent to about 3,600 PJ/a is avoided  through efficiency gains by 2050 compared to the reference  scenario. as a result of the introduction of low energy  standards and highly efficient technologies e.g. for industrial  and commercial process heat, cooking and air conditioning,  enjoyment of the same comfort and energy services will be  accompanied by much lower future energy demand.    6.5.2 electricity generation  the development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. this  trend will more than compensate for the phasing out of  nuclear power production in the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, continuously reducing the number of fossil fuel-fired  power plants as well. By 2050, 95% of the electricity  produced in africa will come from renewable energy sources  in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario. ‘new’ renewables –  mainly wind, Pv, csP and geothermal energy – will contribute  80% to the total electricity generation. already by 2020 the  share of renewable electricity production will be 31% and  65% by 2030. the installed capacity of renewables will reach  about 380 gW in 2030 and 1,390 gW by 2050.  a 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the advanced scenario leads to around 2,000 gW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  table 6.5.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies in africa over time. Until 2020 hydro  will remain the main renewable power source. By 2020 wind  and Pv overtake biomass, currently the second largest  contributor to the growing renewable market. after 2020, the  continuing growth of wind and Pv will be complemented by  electricity from solar thermal, geothermal and ocean energy.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios will lead to a high share of  fluctuating power generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of  already 38% to 45% by 2030 and 50% 2050. therefore,  smart grids, demand side management (dsm), energy  storage capacities and other options need to be expanded in  order to increase the flexibility of the power system for grid  integration, load balancing and a secure supply of electricity.    6.5.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.5.6 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both energy [r]evolution scenarios  decreases the future costs of electricity generation compared  to the reference scenario by 2030. the difference in full cost  of generation will be around 1.4 Us$ct/kWh in the basic  energy [r]evolution and around 1.3 Us$ct/kWh in the  advanced scenario, without taking into account integration  costs for storage or other load-balancing measures. Because  of increasing prices for conventional fuels, electricity  generation costs will become economically favourable  starting just after 2020 under the energy [r]evolution  scenarios. By 2050, the cost will be 2.8/2.1 Us$ct/kWh,  respectively, below those in the reference case.  Under the reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total  electricity supply costs rising from today’s Us$ 67 billion per  year to more than Us$ 277 billion in 2050, compared to Us$  326 billion in the basic and Us$ 507 billion in the advanced  energy [r]evolution scenario. figure 6.5.6 shows that both  energy [r]evolution scenarios not only comply with africa´s  co2 reduction targets, but also help stabilise energy costs  and relieve the economic pressure on society.  increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term total costs for electricity supply  that are only 18% higher in the basic energy [r]evolution  scenario than in the reference scenario, despite a 57%  increase in electricity production. the advanced scenario with  100% renewable power and more than a doubling of generation  results in supply costs 83% higher than the reference case.  6.5.4 future investments in the power sector  around Us$ 3,410 billion is required in investment for the  energy [r]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of  the plants) - approximately Us$ 87 billion per year, Us$ 2,220  billion more than in the reference scenario (Us$ 1,190  billion). investments for the advanced scenario sum up to  Us$ 4,890 billion until 2050, on average Us$ 125 billion per  year. Under the reference scenario, the levels of investment  in conventional power plants add up to almost 42% while  approximately 58% would be invested in renewable energies  and cogeneration until 2050.  Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios, however, africa  would shift almost 95%/96% of the entire investment towards  renewables and cogeneration, respectively. By 2030, the  fossil fuel share of power sector investment would be focused  mainly on gas power plants.  Because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario reach a total  of Us$ 2,500 billion up to 2050, Us$ 64 billion per year. the  total fuel cost savings therefore would cover 110% of the  total additional investments compared to the reference  scenario. fuel cost savings in the advanced scenario are  even higher and add up to Us$ 2,670 billion, or Us$ 68 billion  per year. renewable energy sources would then go on to  produce electricity without any further fuel costs beyond  2050, while costs for coal and gas will continue to be a  burden on national economies.    6.5.5 energy supply for heating  today, traditional biomass use meets around 60% of africa’s  energy demand for heat. incentives to move to improved and  modern biomass technologies are vital to enhance efficiency  and to keep biomass consumption in check. dedicated  support instruments are required to ensure a dynamic  development in particular for renewable technologies for  buildings and renewable process heat production. in the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario, renewables already  provide 68% of africa’s total heat demand in 2030 and 91%  in 2050.  • energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating and cooking by 21% in  2050 (relative to the reference scenario), in spite of  improving living standards and economic growth.  • in the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • a shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  co2 emissions.  table 6.5.8 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating in africa over time. although  biomass remains the main contributor, its market share is  decrasing and with it unefficient traditional biomass. after  2030, the continuing growth of solar collectors and a growing  share of geothermal and environmental heat as well as heat  from renewable hydrogen will further reduce the dependence  on fossil fuels. the advanced scenario results in a complete  substitution of the remaining gas consumption by hydrogen  generated from renewable electricity.    6.5.6 future investments in the heating sector  also in the heating sector the energy [r]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment  strategies in heating technologies. in particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped  for the heating sector. the use of biomass for heating  purposes - often traditional biomass today - will be  substantially reduced in the energy [r]evolution scenarios  and replaced by more efficient and sustainable renewable  heating technologies.  renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to  very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems.  thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the energy  [r]evolution scenario in total requires around Us$ 610 billion  to be invested in renewable heating technologies up to 2050  (including investments for replacement after the economic  lifetime of the plants) - approximately Us$ 16 billion per year.  the advanced scenario assumes an equally ambitious  expansion of renewable technologies, while the main strategy  in the scenario is the substitution of the remaining natural gas  amounts with electricity, hydrogen or other synthetic fuels.    6.5.8 transport  in 2050, the car fleet in africa will be significantly larger than  today. today, a large share of old cars are driven in africa.  With growing individual mobility, an increasing share of small  efficient cars is projected in the energy[r]evolution scenarios.  due to population increase, gdP growth and higher living  standards, energy demand from the transport sector is  expected to increase in the reference scenario by around  170% to 10,400 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario, efficiency measures and modal shifts  will save 43% (4,500 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the  reference scenario.  additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the advanced scenario of 51%  (5,260 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. By 2030, electricity will provide 3% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the energy  [r]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 25% (35% in the  advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the  transport sector. in 2050, up to 1,540 PJ/a of hydrogen is  used in the transport sector for the advanced energy    6.5.10 development of co2 emissions  Whilst africa`s emissions of co2 will increase by 149%  between 2012 and 2050 under the reference scenario, under  the energy [r]evolution scenario they will decrease from  1,050 million tonnes in 2012 to 363 million tonnes in 2050.  annual per capita emissions will drop from 1 tonne to 0.2  tonne. in spite of the abstinence of nuclear power production  and increasing power demand, co2 emissions will decrease  in the electricity sector. in the long run efficiency gains and  the increased use of renewable electricity in vehicles strongly  reduce emissions in the transport sector as well. With a 57%  share of co2, the transport sector will be the largest source  of emissions in 2050 in the basic e[r] scenario. By 2050,  africa´s co2 emissions are 33% below 1990 levels in the  energy [r]evolution scenario while energy consumption is  fully decarbonised in the advanced case.  6.5.11 primary energy consumption  taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the energy  [r]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.5.12. Under the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario, primary energy demand  will increase by 19% from today’s 30,970 PJ/a to around  37,000 PJ/a compared to the reference scenario, overall  primary energy demand will be reduced by 44% in 2050  under the energy [r]evolution scenario (reference: around  367,000 PJ in 2050). the advanced scenario results due to  additional conversion losses in a primary energy consumption  of around 39,500 PJ in 2050.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and  oil as fast as technically and economically possible by  expansion of renewable energies and a fast introduction of  very efficient vehicle concepts in the transport sector to  replace oil based combustion engines. this leads to an  overall renewable primary energy share of 56% in 2030 and  81% in 2050 in the basic energy [r]evolution and of more  than 97% in 2050 in the advanced case (incl. non-energy  consumption). in contrast to the reference scenario, no new  nuclear power plants will be built in africa in the energy  [r]evolution scenarios.    6.6.1 final energy demand by sector  combining the projections on population development, gdP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for middle east’s final energy demand. these are  shown in figure 6.6.1 for the reference and energy  [r]evolution scenarios. Under the reference scenario, total  final energy demand increases by 134% from the current  15,300 PJ/a to 35,800 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario, final energy demand increases at a  much lower rate by 12% compared to current consumption  and is expected to reach 17,200 PJ/a by 2050. the  advanced scenario results in some additional reductions due  to a higher share of electric cars.  Under both energy [r]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.6.2). total electricity demand will rise from about  730 tWh/a to 2,440 tWh/a by 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. compared to the reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 810 tWh/a.  6.6 middle east  this reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. the transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to  2,700 tWh/a. electricity will become the major renewable  ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for various purposes  but also for the generation of synthetic fuels for fossil fuels  substitution. around 650 tWh are used in 2050 for electric  vehicles and rail transport in 2050 in the advanced scenario,  around 650 tWh for hydrogen and 60 tWh for synthetic liquid  fuel generation for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  efficiency gains in the heating sector are even larger than in the  electricity sector. Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios,  consumption equivalent to about 6,600 PJ/a is avoided  through efficiency gains by 2050 compared to the reference  scenario. as a result of the introduction of low energy  standards and highly efficient technologies e.g. for industrial  and commercial process heat, cooking and air conditioning,  enjoyment of the same comfort and energy services will be  accompanied by much lower future energy demand.    6.6.2 electricity generation  the development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. this  trend will more than compensate for the strong reduction of  fossil fuel fired power plants in the energy [r]evolution  scenarios. By 2050, 93% of the electricity produced in middle  east will come from renewable energy sources in the basic  energy [r]evolution scenario. ‘new’ renewables – mainly  wind, Pv, csP and geothermal energy – will contribute 86%  to the total electricity generation. already by 2020 the share  of renewable electricity production will be 14% and 52% by  2030. the installed capacity of renewables will reach about  360 gW in 2030 and 1,170 gW by 2050.  a 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the advanced scenario leads to around 1,510 gW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  table 6.6.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies in middle east over time. By 2020  wind and Pv overtake hydro, currently the largest contributor  to the growing renewable market. after 2020, the continuing  growth of wind and Pv will be complemented by electricity  from solar thermal, geothermal and ocean energy. the energy  [r]evolution scenarios will lead to a high share of fluctuating  power generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of already  28% to 34% by 2030 and 45% to 41% by 2050. therefore,  smart grids, demand side management (dsm), energy  storage capacities and other options need to be expanded in  order to increase the flexibility of the power system for grid  integration, load balancing and a secure supply of electricity.    6.6.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.6.6 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both energy [r]evolution scenarios  decreases the future costs of electricity generation compared  to the reference scenario by 2030. this difference in full cost  of generation will be less than 2.8 Us$ct/kWh in the basic  energy [r]evolution and about 3 Us$ct/kWh in the advanced  scenario, without taking into account integration costs for  storage or other load-balancing measures. Because of  increasing prices for conventional fuels, electricity generation  costs will become economically favourable in the future under  the energy [r]evolution scenarios. By 2050, the cost will be  6.8/5.8 Us$ct/kWh, respectively, below those in the  reference case.  Under the reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total  electricity supply costs rising from today’s Us$ 138 billion per  year to more than Us$ 379 billion in 2050, compared to Us$  302 billion in the basic and Us$ 453 billion in the advanced  energy [r]evolution scenario. figure 6.6.6 shows that both  energy [r]evolution scenarios not only comply with middle  east´s co2 reduction targets, but also help stabilise energy  costs and relieve the economic pressure on society.  increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term costs for electricity supply that  are 20% lower in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario than in  the reference scenario despite a 40% increase in electricity  production. the advanced scenario with 100% renewable  power and an increase in power generation of 89% results in  supply costs 20% higher than the reference case.  6.6.4 future investments in the power sector  around Us$ 3,400 billion is required in investment for the  energy [r]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of  the plants) - approximately Us$ 87 billion per year,  Us$ 2,570 billion more than in the reference scenario  (Us$ 835 billion). investments for the advanced scenario sum  up to Us$ 4,700 billion until 2050, on average Us$ 121 billion  per year. Under the reference scenario, the levels of  investment in conventional power plants add up to almost  64% while approximately 36% would be invested in  renewable energies and cogeneration until 2050.  Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios, however, middle  east would shift almost 93%/96% of the entire investment  towards renewables and cogeneration, respectively. By 2030,  the fossil fuel share of power sector investment would be  focused mainly on gas power plants.  Because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario reach a total  of Us$ 4,270 billion up to 2050, Us$ 109 billion per year. the  total fuel cost savings therefore would cover 170% of the  total additional investments compared to the reference  scenario. fuel cost savings in the advanced scenario are  even higher and add up to Us$ 4,570 billion, or  Us$ 117 billion per year. renewable energy sources would  then go on to produce electricity without any further fuel  costs beyond 2050, while costs for coal and gas will continue  to be a burden on national economies.    6.6.5 energy supply for heating  today, renewables meet around 1% of middle east’s energy  demand for heating, the main contribution coming from the  use of biomass. dedicated support instruments are required  to ensure a dynamic development in particular for renewable  technologies for buildings and renewable process heat  production. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  renewables already provide 24% of middle east’s total heat  demand in 2030 and 78% in 2050.  • energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating and processes by 43 %  in 2050 (relative to the reference scenario), in spite of  improving living standards and economic growth.  • in the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • a shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  co2 emissions.  table 6.6.2 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating in middle east over time. By 2030,  the continuing growth of solar collectors and a growing share  of geothermal and environmental heat as well as heat from  renewable hydrogen will reduce the dependence on fossil  fuels. the advanced scenario results in a complete  substitution of the remaining gas consumption by hydrogen  generated from renewable electricity.    6.6.6 future investments in the heating sector  also in the heating sector the energy [r]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment  strategies in heating technologies. in particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped  for the heating sector. the use of biomass for heating  purposes - often traditional biomass today - will be redirected  towards new efficient technologies in the energy [r]evolution  scenarios and supplement other sustainable renewable  heating technologies.  renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to  very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems.  thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the energy  [r]evolution scenario in total requires around Us$ 430 billion  to be invested in renewable heating technologies up to 2050  (including investments for replacement after the economic  lifetime of the plants) - approximately Us$ 11 billion per year.  the advanced scenario assumes an equally ambitious  expansion of renewable technologies resulting in an average  investment of around Us$ 12 billion per year, while the main  strategy in the scenario is the substitution of the remaining  natural gas amounts with electricity, hydrogen or other  synthetic fuels.    6.6.8 transport  a key target in middle east is to introduce incentives for  people to drive smaller cars and buy new, more efficient  vehicle concepts. in addition, it is vital to shift transport use  to efficient modes like rail, light rail and buses, especially in  the expanding urban areas. along with rising prices for fossil  fuels, these changes reduce the further growth in car sales  projected under the reference scenario. due to population  increase, gdP growth and higher living standards, energy  demand from the transport sector is expected to increase in  the reference scenario by around 140% to 12,680 PJ/a in  2050. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario, efficiency  measures and modal shifts will save 59% (7,530 PJ/a) in  2050 compared to the reference scenario.  additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the advanced scenario of 63%  (7,950 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. By 2030, electricity will provide 8% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the energy  [r]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 40% (49% in the  advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the  transport sector. in 2050, up to 1,810 PJ/a of hydrogen is  used in the transport sector for the advanced energy  [r]evolution scenario.    6.6.10 development of co2 emissions  Whilst middle east’s emissions of co2 will double between 2012  and 2050 under the reference scenario, under the energy  [r]evolution scenario they will decrease from 1,670 million  tonnes in 2012 to 294 million tonnes in 2050. annual per capita  emissions will drop from 7.7 tonne to 0.8 tonne. in spite of the  abstinence of nuclear power production and increasing power  demand, co2 emissions will decrease in the electricity sector. in  the long run efficiency gains and the increased use of renewable  electricity in vehicles strongly reduce emissions in the transport  sector as well. With a 32% share of co2, the Power generation  sector will be the largest source of emissions in 2050 in the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario. By 2050, middle east´s co2  emissions are 47% below 1990 levels in the energy [r]evolution  scenario while energy consumption is fully decarbonised in the  advanced case.  6.6.11 primary energy consumption  taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the energy  [r]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.6.12. Under the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario, primary energy demand  will decrease by 8% from today’s 28,270 PJ/a to around  26,000 PJ/a. compared to the reference scenario, overall  primary energy demand will be reduced by 55% in 2050  under the energy [r]evolution scenario (reference scenario:  around 58,000 PJ in 2050). due to additional conversion  losses, the advanced scenario results in a primary energy  consumption of around 27,300 PJ in 2050.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and  oil as fast as technically and economically possible by  expansion of renewable energies and a fast introduction of  very efficient vehicle concepts in the transport sector to  replace oil based combustion engines. this leads to an  overall renewable primary energy share of 20% in 2030 and  66% in 2050 in the basic energy [r]evolution and of more  than 85% in 2050 in the advanced case (incl. non-energy  consumption). in contrast to the reference scenario, no new  nuclear power plants will be built in middle east in the energy  [r]evolution scenarios.    6.7.1 final energy demand by sector  combining the projections on population development, gdP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for eastern europe/eurasia’s final energy demand.  these are shown in figure 6.7.1 for the reference and energy  [r]evolution scenarios. Under the reference scenario, total  final energy demand increases by 53% from the current  27,400 PJ/a to 41,800 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario, final energy demand decreases by 19%  compared to current consumption and is expected to reach  22,100 PJ/a by 2050 the advanced scenario results in some  additional reductions due to a higher share of electric cars.  Under both energy [r]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.7.2). total electricity demand will rise from about  1,250 tWh/a to 2,360 tWh/a by 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. compared to the reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 870 tWh/a.  6.7 eastern europe/eurasia  this reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. the transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to  2,500 tWh/a. electricity will become the major renewable  ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for various purposes  but also for the generation of synthetic fuels for fossil fuels  substitution. around 580 tWh are used in 2050 for electric  vehicles and rail transport in 2050 in the advanced scenario,  around 170 tWh for hydrogen and 150 tWh for synthetic liquid  fuel generation for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  efficiency gains in the heating sector are even larger than in  the electricity sector. Under the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, consumption equivalent to about 11,700 PJ/a is  avoided through efficiency gains by 2050 compared to the  reference scenario. as a result of energy-related renovation  of the existing stock of residential buildings, the introduction  of low energy standards and ‘passive climatisation’ for new  buildings, as well as highly efficient air conditioning systems,  enjoyment of the same comfort and energy services will be  accompanied with much lower future energy demand.  144      6.7.2 electricity generation  the development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. this  trend will more than compensate for the phasing out of  nuclear power production in the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, continuously reducing the number of fossil fuelfired  power plants as well. By 2050, 86% of the electricity  produced in eastern europe/eurasia will come from  renewable energy sources in the basic energy [r]evolution  scenario. ‘new’ renewables – mainly wind, Pv, csP and  geothermal energy – will contribute 51% to the total  electricity generation. already by 2020 the share of renewable  electricity production will be 23% and 49% by 2030. the  installed capacity of renewables will reach about 460 gW in  2030 and 1,120 gW by 2050.  a 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the advanced scenario leads to around 1,790 gW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  table 6.7.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies in eastern europe/eurasia over time.  Up to 2020 wind, biomass and Pv will become the main  contributors to the growing market share. after 2020, the  continuing growth of wind, biomass and Pv will be  complemented by electricity from solar thermal, geothermal  and ocean energy. the energy [r]evolution scenarios will lead  to a high share of fluctuating power generation sources (Pv,  wind and ocean) of already 23% to 29% by 2030 and 52% to  61% by 2050. therefore, smart grids, demand side  management (dsm), energy storage capacities and other  options need to be expanded in order to increase the  flexibility of the power system for grid integration, load  balancing and a secure supply of electricity.    6.7.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.7.6 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both energy [r]evolution scenarios  increases the future costs of electricity generation compared to  the reference scenario until 2020. this difference in full cost of  generation will be less than 0.2 Us$ct/kWh in both energy  [r]evolution scenarios, without taking into account integration  costs for storage or other load-balancing measures. Because of  increasing prices for conventional fuels, electricity generation  costs will become economically favourable before 2030 under  the energy [r]evolution scenarios. By 2050, the cost in the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario will be 2.2 Us$ct/kWh below  those in the reference case, in the advanced scenario the cost  will be equal to the reference case.  Under the reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total electricity  supply costs rising from today’s Us$ 212 billion per year to more  than Us$ 379 billion in 2050, compared to  Us$ 326 billion in the basic and Us$ 566 billion in the advanced  energy [r]evolution scenario. figure 6.7.6 shows that both  energy [r]evolution scenarios not only comply with eastern  europe/eurasia´s co2 reduction targets, but also help stabilise  energy costs and relieve the economic pressure on society.  increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term costs for electricity supply that  are 14% lower in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario than  in the reference scenario despite a 5% increase in electricity  production. the advanced scenario with 100% renewable  power and an increase in power generation of 58% results in  supply costs 49% higher than the reference case.  6.7.4 future investments in the power sector  around Us$ 2,970 billion is required in investment for the  energy [r]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of  the plants) - approximately Us$ 76 billion per year,  Us$ 1,690 billion more than in the reference scenario  (Us$ 1,280 billion). investments for the advanced scenario  add up to Us$ 4,390 billion until 2050, on average  Us$ 113 billion per year, including high investments in  additional power plants for the production of synthetic fuels.  Under the reference scenario, the levels of investment in  conventional power plants add up to almost 41% while  approximately 59% would be invested in renewable energies  and cogeneration until 2050.  Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios, however, eastern  europe/eurasia would shift almost 97% of the entire  investment towards renewables and cogeneration. By 2030,  the fossil fuel share of power sector investment would be  focused mainly on gas power plants.  Because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario reach a total  of Us$ 3,280 billion up to 2050, Us$ 84 billion per year. the  total fuel cost savings therefore would cover 190% of the  total additional investments compared to the reference  scenario. fuel cost savings in the advanced scenario are  even higher and add up to Us$ 3,540 billion, or Us$ 91 billion  per year. renewable energy sources would then go on to  produce electricity without any further fuel costs beyond  2050, while costs for coal and gas will continue to be a  burden on national economies.    6.7.5 energy supply for heating  today, renewables meet around 4% of eastern  europe/eurasia’s energy demand for heating, the main  contribution coming from the use of biomass. dedicated  support instruments are required to ensure a dynamic  development in particular for renewable technologies for  buildings and renewable process heat production. in the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario, renewables already  provide 29% of eastern europe/eurasia’s total heat demand  in 2030 and 86% in 2050.  • energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating by 44% in 2050  (relative to the reference scenario), in spite of improving  living standards and economic growth.  • in the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • a shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  co2 emissions.  table 6.7.2 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating in eastern europe/eurasia over time.  Up to 2030 biomass remains the main contributor of the  growing market share. after 2030, the continuing growth of  solar collectors and a growing share of geothermal and  environmental heat as well as heat from renewable hydrogen  will further reduce the dependence on fossil fuels. the  advanced scenario results in a complete substitution of the  remaining gas consumption by hydrogen generated from  renewable electricity.    6.7.6 future investments in the heating sector  also in the heating sector the energy [r]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment  strategies in heating technologies. in particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped  for the heating sector. the use of biomass for heating  purposes - often traditional biomass today - will be  substantially reduced in the energy [r]evolution scenarios  and replaced by more efficient and sustainable renewable  heating technologies.  renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to  very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems.  thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the energy  [r]evolution scenario in total requires around  Us$ 1,790 billion to be invested in renewable heating  technologies up to 2050 (including investments for  replacement after the economic lifetime of the plants) -  approximately Us$ 46 billion per year. the advanced  scenario assumes an even more ambitious expansion of  renewable technologies resulting in an average investment of  around Us$ 48 billion per year, while the main strategy in the  scenario is the substitution of the remaining natural gas  amounts with hydrogen or other synthetic fuels.    6.7.8 transport  a key target in eastern europe/eurasia is to introduce  incentives for people to drive smaller cars and buy new, more  efficient vehicle concepts. in addition, it is vital to shift  transport use to efficient modes like rail, light rail and buses,  especially in the metropolitan areas. along with rising prices  for fossil fuels, these changes reduce the further growth in  car sales projected under the reference scenario. due to  population increase, gdP growth and higher living standards,  energy demand from the transport sector is expected to  increase in the reference scenario by around 38% to 8,310  PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  efficiency measures and modal shifts will save 49% (4,060  PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the advanced scenario of 59%  (4,880 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. By 2030, electricity will provide 13% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the energy  [r]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 51% (61% in the  advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the transport  sector. in 2050, up to 460 PJ/a of hydrogen is used in the  transport sector for the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario.    6.7.10 development of co2 emissions  Whilst eastern europe/eurasia’s emissions of co2 will increase  by 31% between 2012 and 2050 under the reference  scenario, under the energy [r]evolution scenario they will  decrease from 2,710 million tonnes in 2012 to 317 million  tonnes in 2050. annual per capita emissions will drop from 8  tonne to 1 tonne. in spite of the abstinence of nuclear power  production and increasing power demand, co2 emissions will  decrease in the electricity sector. in the long run efficiency  gains and the increased use of renewable electricity in vehicles  strongly reduce emissions in the transport sector as well.  With a 39% share of co2, the Power generation sector will be  the largest source of emissions in 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. By 2050, eastern europe/eurasia´s co2  emissions are around 92% below 1990 levels in the energy  [r]evolution scenario while energy consumption is fully  decarbonised in the advanced case.  6.7.11 primary energy consumption  taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the energy  [r]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.7.12. Under the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario, primary energy demand  will decrease by 29% from today’s 49,310 PJ/a to around  35,000 PJ/a. compared to the reference scenario, overall  primary energy demand will be reduced by 47% in 2050  under the energy [r]evolution scenario (reference scenario:  around 66,000 PJ in 2050). the advanced scenario results  due to additional conversion losses in a primary energy  consumption of around 39,700 PJ in 2050.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and oil  as fast as technically and economically possible by expansion of  renewable energies and a fast introduction of very efficient  vehicle concepts in the transport sector to replace oil based  combustion engines. this leads to an overall renewable primary  energy share of 25% in 2030 and 73% in 2050 in the basic  energy [r]evolution and of more than 91% in 2050 in the  advanced case (incl. non-energy consumption). in contrast to the  reference scenario, no new nuclear power plants will be built in  eastern europe/eurasia in the energy [r]evolution scenarios.  152    6.8.1 final energy demand by sector  combining the projections on population development, gdP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for india’s final energy demand. these are shown in  figure 6.8.1 for the reference and energy [r]evolution  scenarios. Under the reference scenario, total final energy  demand increases by 208% from the current 19,900 PJ/a to  61,200 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  final energy demand increases at a much lower rate by 79%  compared to current consumption and is expected to reach  35,600 PJ/a by 2050. the advanced scenario results in some  additional reductions due to a higher share of electric cars.  Under both energy [r]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.8.2). total electricity demand will decrease from about  870 tWh/a to 4,920 tWh/a by 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. compared to the reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 1,080 tWh/a.  6.8 india  this reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. the transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to  5,500 tWh/a. electricity will become the major renewable  ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for various purposes  but also for the generation of synthetic fuels for fossil fuels  substitution. around 1,190 tWh are used in 2050 for electric  vehicles and rail transport in 2050 in the advanced scenario,  around 440 tWh for hydrogen and 540 tWh for synthetic liquid  fuel generation for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  efficiency gains in the heating sector are even larger than in  the electricity sector. Under the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, consumption equivalent to about 6,200 PJ/a is  avoided through efficiency gains by 2050 compared to the  reference scenario. as a result of energy-related renovation  of the existing stock of residential buildings, the introduction  of low energy standards and ‘passive climatisation’ for new  buildings, as well as highly efficient air conditioning systems,  enjoyment of the same comfort and energy services will be  accompanied with much lower future energy demand.    6.8.2 electricity generation  the development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. this  trend will more than compensate for the phasing out of  nuclear power production in the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, continuously reducing the number of fossil fuel-fired  power plants as well. By 2050, 93% of the electricity  produced in india will come from renewable energy sources in  the basic energy [r]evolution scenario. ‘new’ renewables –  mainly wind, Pv, csP and geothermal energy – will contribute  71% to the total electricity generation. already by 2020 the  share of renewable electricity production will be 23% and  56% by 2030. the installed capacity of renewables will reach  about 770 gW in 2030 and 2,240 gW by 2050.  a 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the advanced scenario leads to around 3,260 gW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  table 6.8.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies in india over time. Up to 2020 wind  and Pv will become the main contributors to the growing  market share. after 2020, the continuing growth of wind and  Pv will be complemented by electricity from solar thermal,  geothermal and ocean energy. the energy [r]evolution  scenarios will lead to a high share of fluctuating power  generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of already 38% to  47% by 2030 and 62% to 70% by 2050. therefore, smart  grids, demand side management (dsm), energy storage  capacities and other options need to be expanded in order to  increase the flexibility of the power system for grid  integration, load balancing and a secure supply of electricity.  156    6.8.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.8.6 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both energy [r]evolution scenarios  increases the future costs of electricity generation compared  to the reference scenario until 2030. this difference in full  cost of generation will be about 0.1 Us$ct/kWh in the  advanced scenario, without taking into account integration  costs for storage or other load-balancing measures. Because  of increasing prices for conventional fuels, electricity  generation costs will become economically favourable  starting in 2030 under the energy [r]evolution scenarios. By  2050, the cost will be 2.1/1.6 Us$ct/kWh, respectively, below  those in the reference case.  Under the reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total  electricity supply costs rising from today’s Us$ 84 billion per  year to more than Us$ 471 billion in 2050, compared to  Us$ 485 billion in the basic and Us$ 673 billion in the  advanced energy [r]evolution scenario. figure 6.8.6 shows  that both energy [r]evolution scenarios not only comply with  india´s co2 reduction targets, but also help stabilise energy  costs and relieve the economic pressure on society.  increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term costs for electricity supply that  are 3% higher than in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario  than in the reference scenario, despite a 19% increase in  electricity production. the advanced scenario with 100%  renewable power and an increase in power generation of 60%  results in supply costs 43% higher than the reference case.  6.8.4 future investments in the power sector  around Us$ 5,370 billion is required in investment for the  energy [r]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of the  plants) - approximately Us$ 138 billion per year, Us$ 3,110  billion more than in the reference scenario (Us$ 2,260 billion).  investments for the advanced scenario add up to Us$ 7,220  billion until 2050, on average Us$ 185 billion per year,  including high investments in additional power plants for the  production of synthetic fuels. Under the reference scenario,  the levels of investment in conventional power plants add up  to almost 72% while approximately 28% would be invested in  renewable energies and cogeneration until 2050.  Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios, however, india  would shift up to 95% of the entire investment towards  renewables and cogeneration. By 2030, the fossil fuel share  of power sector investment would be focused mainly on gas  power plants.  Because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario reach a total  of Us$ 3,430 billion up to 2050, Us$ 88 billion per year. the  total fuel cost savings therefore would cover 110% of the  total additional investments compared to the reference  scenario. fuel cost savings in the advanced scenario are  even higher and add up to Us$ 3,720 billion, or Us$ 95 billion  per year. renewable energy sources would then go on to  produce electricity without any further fuel costs beyond  2050, while costs for coal and gas will continue to be a  burden on national economies.    6.8.5 energy supply for heating  today, renewables meet around 50% of india’s energy  demand for heat, the main contribution coming from the use  of biomass. dedicated support instruments are required to  ensure a dynamic development in particular for renewable  technologies for buildings and renewable process heat  production. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  renewables already provide 55% of india’s total heat demand  in 2030 and 87% in 2050.  • energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating by 25% in 2050  (relative to the reference scenario), in spite of improving  living standards and economic growth.  • in the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • a shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  co2 emissions.  table 6.8.2 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating in india over time. Up to 2030  biomass remains the main contributor of the growing market  share. after 2030, the continuing growth of solar collectors  and a growing share of geothermal and environmental heat as  well as heat from renewable hydrogen will further reduce the  dependence on fossil fuels. the advanced scenario results in  a complete substitution of the remaining gas consumption by  hydrogen generated from renewable electricity.    6.8.6 future investments in the heating sector  also in the heating sector the energy [r]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment  strategies in heating technologies. in particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped  for the heating sector. the use of biomass for heating  purposes - often traditional biomass today - will be  substantially reduced in the energy [r]evolution scenarios  and replaced by more efficient and sustainable renewable  heating technologies.  renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to  very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems.  thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the energy  [r]evolution scenario in total requires around  Us$ 1,020 billion to be invested in renewable heating  technologies up to 2050 (including investments for  replacement after the economic lifetime of the plants) -  approximately Us$ 26 billion per year. the advanced  scenario assumes an even more ambitious expansion of  renewable technologies resulting in an average investment of  around Us$ 27 billion per year, while the main strategy in the  scenario is the substitution of the remaining natural gas  amounts with hydrogen or other synthetic fuels.      6.8.8 transport  in 2050, the car fleet in india will be significantly larger than  today. therefore a key target is the successful introduction of  highly efficient vehicle concepts. in addition, it is vital to shift  transport use to efficient modes like rail, light rail and buses,  especially in the expanding large metropolitan areas. along  with rising prices for fossil fuels, these changes reduce the  further growth in car sales projected under the reference  scenario. due to population increase, gdP growth and higher  living standards, energy demand from the transport sector is  expected to strongly increase in the reference scenario by  around 518% to 19,030 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario, efficiency measures and modal shifts  will save 50% (9,530 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the  reference scenario.  additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the advanced scenario of 64%  (12,100 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. By 2030, electricity will provide 5% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the energy  [r]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 38% (62% in the  advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the  transport sector. in 2050, up to 1,220 PJ/a of hydrogen is  used in the transport sector for the advanced energy  [r]evolution scenario.  6    6.8.10 development of co2 emissions  Whilst india’s emissions of co2 will increase by 248%  between 2012 and 2050 under the reference scenario, under  the energy [r]evolution scenario they will decrease from  1,950 million tonnes in 2012 to 780 million tonnes in 2050.  annual per capita emissions will drop from 1.6 tonne to 0.5  tonne. in spite of the abstinence of nuclear power production  and increasing power demand, co2 emissions will decrease  in the electricity sector. in the long run efficiency gains and  the increased use of renewable electricity in vehicles strongly  reduce emissions in the transport sector as well.  With a 34% share of co2, the transport sector will be the largest  source of emissions in 2050 in the basic energy [r]evolution  scenario. By 2050, india´s co2 emissions are still 34% above  1990 levels in the energy [r]evolution scenario while energy  consumption is fully decarbonised in the advanced case.  6.8.11 primary energy consumption  taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the energy  [r]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.8.12. Under the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario, primary energy demand  will increase by 58% from today’s 32,940 PJ/a to around  52,000 PJ/a. compared to the reference scenario, overall  primary energy demand will be reduced by 47% in 2050  under the energy [r]evolution scenario (reference scenario:  around 99,000 PJ in 2050). the advanced scenario results in  a primary energy consumption of around 51,300 PJ in 2050.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and  oil as fast as technically and economically possible by  expansion of renewable energies and a fast introduction of  very efficient vehicle concepts in the transport sector to  replace oil based combustion engines. this leads to an  overall renewable primary energy share of 34% in 2030 and  74% in 2050 in the basic energy [r]evolution and of more  than 94% in 2050 in the advanced case (incl. non-energy  consumption). in contrast to the reference scenario, no new  nuclear power plants will be built in india in the energy  [r]evolution scenarios.    6.9.1 final energy demand by sector  combining the projections on population development, gdP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for other asia’s final energy demand. these are  shown in figure 6.9.1 for the reference and energy  [r]evolution scenarios. Under the reference scenario, total  final energy demand increases by 118% from the current  23,000 PJ/a to 50,200 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario, final energy demand increases at a  much lower rate by 25% compared to current consumption  and is expected to reach 28,800 PJ/a by 2050. the  advanced scenario results in some additional reductions due  to a higher share of electric cars.  Under both energy [r]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.9.2). total electricity demand will rise from about 1,080  tWh/a to 3,680 tWh/a by 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. compared to the reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 1,730 tWh/a.  6.9 other asia  this reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. the transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to  4,000 tWh/a. electricity will become the major renewable  ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for various purposes  but also for the generation of synthetic fuels for fossil fuels  substitution. around 680 tWh are used in 2050 for electric  vehicles and rail transport in 2050 in the advanced scenario,  around 630 tWh for hydrogen and 70 tWh for synthetic liquid  fuel generation for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  efficiency gains in the heating sector are even larger than in  the electricity sector. Under the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, consumption equivalent to about 6,100 PJ/a is  avoided through efficiency gains by 2050 compared to the  reference scenario. as a result of energy-related renovation  of the existing stock of residential buildings, the introduction  of low energy standards and ‘passive climatisation’ for new  buildings, as well as highly efficient air conditioning systems,  enjoyment of the same comfort and energy services will be  accompanied with much lower future energy demand.    6.9.2 electricity generation  the development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. this  trend will more than compensate for the phasing out of  nuclear power production in the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, continuously reducing the number of fossil fuel-fired  power plants as well. By 2050, 92% of the electricity  produced in other asia will come from renewable energy  sources in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario. ‘new’  renewables – mainly wind, Pv, csP and geothermal energy –  will contribute 73% to the total electricity generation. already  by 2020 the share of renewable electricity production will be  25% and 60% by 2030. the installed capacity of renewables  will reach about 620 gW in 2030 and 1,930 gW by 2050.  a 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the advanced scenario leads to around 2,450 gW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  table 6.9.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies in other asia over time. Up to 2020  wind and Pv will become the main contributors to the  growing market share. after 2020, the continuing growth of  wind and Pv will be complemented by electricity from solar  thermal, geothermal and ocean energy. the energy  [r]evolution scenarios will lead to a high share of fluctuating  power generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of already  33% to 34% by 2030 and 57% to 54% by 2050. therefore,  smart grids, demand side management (dsm), energy  storage capacities and other options need to be expanded in  order to increase the flexibility of the power system for grid  integration, load balancing and a secure supply of electricity.    6.9.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.9.6 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both energy [r]evolution scenarios  increases the future costs of electricity generation compared  to the reference scenario until 2030. this difference in full  cost of generation will be less than 0.1 Us$ct/kWh in the  basic energy [r]evolution and about 0.4 Us$ct/kWh in the  advanced scenario, without taking into account integration  costs for storage or other load-balancing measures. Because  of increasing prices for conventional fuels, electricity  generation costs will become economically favourable  starting in 2030 under the energy [r]evolution scenarios. By  2050, the cost will be 2.3/1.4 Us$ct/kWh, respectively, below  those in the reference case.  Under the reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total  electricity supply costs rising from today’s Us$ 136 billion per  year to more than Us$ 488 billion in 2050, compared to  Us$ 450 billion in the basic and Us$ 634 billion in the  advanced energy [r]evolution scenario. figure 6.9.6 shows  that both energy [r]evolution scenarios not only comply with  other asia´s co2 reduction targets, but also help stabilise  energy costs and relieve the economic pressure on society.  increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term costs for electricity supply that  are 8% higher in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario than  in the reference scenario, due to a 12% increase in electricity  production. the advanced scenario with 100% renewable  power and an increase in power generation of 44% results in  supply costs 30% higher than the reference case.  6.9.4 future investments in the power sector  around Us$ 5,020 billion is required in investment for the  energy [r]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of  the plants) - approximately Us$ 129 billion per year,  Us$ 3,250 billion more than in the reference scenario  (Us$ 1,770 billion). investments for the advanced scenario  add up to Us$ 6,270 billion until 2050, on average  Us$ 161 billion per year, including high investments in  additional power plants for the production of synthetic fuels.  Under the reference scenario, the levels of investment in  conventional power plants add up to almost 57% while  approximately 43% would be invested in renewable energies  and cogeneration until 2050.  Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios, however, other asia  would shift almost 93%/95% of the entire investment towards  renewables and cogeneration, respectively. By 2030, the  fossil fuel share of power sector investment would be focused  mainly on gas power plants.  Because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario reach a total  of Us$ 3,810 billion up to 2050, Us$ 98 billion per year. the  total fuel cost savings therefore would cover 120% of the  total additional investments compared to the reference  scenario. fuel cost savings in the advanced scenario are  even higher and add up to Us$ 4,010 billion, or  Us$ 103 billion per year. renewable energy sources would  then go on to produce electricity without any further fuel  costs beyond 2050, while costs for coal and gas will continue  to be a burden on national economies.    6.9.5 energy supply for heating  today, renewables meet around 42% of other asia’s energy  demand for heat, the main contribution coming from the use  of biomass. dedicated support instruments are required to  ensure a dynamic development in particular for renewable  technologies for buildings and renewable process heat  production. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  renewables already provide 56% of other asia’s total heat  demand in 2030 and 86% in 2050.  • energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating by 28 % in 2050  (relative to the reference scenario), in spite of improving  living standards and economic growth.  • in the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • a shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  co2 emissions.  table 6.9.2 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating in other asia over time. Up to 2030  biomass remains the main contributor of the growing market  share. after 2030, the continuing growth of solar collectors  and a growing share of geothermal and environmental heat as  well as heat from renewable hydrogen will further reduce the  dependence on fossil fuels. the advanced scenario results in  a complete substitution of the remaining gas consumption by  hydrogen generated from renewable electricity.    6.9.6 future investments in the heating sector  also in the heating sector the energy [r]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment  strategies in heating technologies. in particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped  for the heating sector. the use of biomass for heating  purposes - often traditional biomass today - will be  substantially reduced in the energy [r]evolution scenarios  and replaced by more efficient and sustainable renewable  heating technologies.  renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to  very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems.  thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the energy  [r]evolution scenario in total requires around Us$ 1,490  billion to be invested in renewable heating technologies up to  2050 (including investments for replacement after the  economic lifetime of the plants) - approximately Us$ 38  billion per year. the advanced scenario assumes an even  more ambitious expansion of renewable technologies  resulting in an average investment of around Us$ 41 billion  per year, while the main strategy in the scenario is the  substitution of the remaining natural gas amounts with  hydrogen or other synthetic fuels.    6.9.8 transport  in 2050, the car fleet in other asia will be significantly larger  than today. therefore a key target is the successful  introduction of highly efficient vehicle concepts. in addition, it  is vital to shift transport use to efficient modes like rail, light  rail and buses, especially in the expanding large metropolitan  areas. along with rising prices for fossil fuels, these changes  reduce the further growth in car sales projected under the  reference scenario. due to population increase, gdP growth  and higher living standards, energy demand from the  transport sector is expected to strongly increase in the  reference scenario by around 108% to 12,220 PJ/a in 2050.  in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario, efficiency measures  and modal shifts will save 49% (5,940 PJ/a) in 2050  compared to the reference scenario.  additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the advanced scenario of 57%  (6,920 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. By 2030, electricity will provide 7% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the energy  [r]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 36% (46% in the  advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the  transport sector. in 2050, up to 1,750 PJ/a of hydrogen is  used in the transport sector for the advanced energy  [r]evolution scenario.    6.9.10 development of co2 emissions  Whilst other asia’s emissions of co2 will increase by 173%  between 2012 and 2050 under the reference scenario, under  the energy [r]evolution scenario they will decrease from  1,740 million tonnes in 2012 to 338 million tonnes in 2050.  annual per capita emissions will drop from 1.6 tonne to  0.2 tonne. in spite of the abstinence of nuclear power  production and increasing power demand, co2 emissions will  decrease in the electricity sector. in the long run efficiency  gains and the increased use of renewable electricity in vehicles  strongly reduce emissions in the transport sector as well.  With a 39% share of co2, the industry sector will be the  largest source of emissions in 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. By 2050, other asia´s co2 emissions  are around 52% below 1990 levels in the energy [r]evolution  scenario while energy consumption is fully decarbonised in  the advanced case.  6.9.11 primary energy consumption  taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the energy  [r]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.9.12. Under the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario, primary energy demand  will increase by 29% from today’s 35,530 PJ/a to around  46,000 PJ/a. compared to the reference scenario, overall  primary energy demand will be reduced by 43% in 2050  under the energy [r]evolution scenario (reference scenario:  around 80,000 PJ in 2050). the advanced scenario results  due to additional conversion losses in a primary energy  consumption of around 46,900 PJ in 2050.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and  oil as fast as technically and economically possible by  expansion of renewable energies and a fast introduction of very  efficient vehicle concepts in the transport sector to replace oil  based combustion engines. this leads to an overall renewable  primary energy share of 43% in 2030 and 79% in 2050 in the  basic energy [r]evolution and of more than 91% in 2050 in the  advanced case (incl. non-energy consumption). in contrast to  the reference scenario, no new nuclear power plants will be  built in other asia in the energy [r]evolution scenarios.    6.10.1 final energy demand by sector  combining the projections on population development, gdP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for china’s final energy demand. these are shown  in figure 6.10.1 for the reference and energy [r]evolution  scenarios. Under the reference scenario, total final energy  demand increases by 70% from the current 65,900 PJ/a to  111,800 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy [r]evolution  scenario, final energy demand decreases by 7% compared to  current consumption and is expected to reach 61,000 PJ/a  by 2050. the advanced scenario results in some additional  reductions due to a higher share of electric cars.  Under both energy [r]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.10.2). total electricity demand will rise from about  4,170 tWh/a to 8,730 tWh/a by 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. compared to the reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 4,760 tWh/a.  6.10 china  this reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. the transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to  9,200 tWh/a. electricity will become the major renewable  ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for various purposes  but also for the generation of synthetic fuels for fossil fuels  substitution. around 1,710 tWh are used in 2050 for electric  vehicles and rail transport in 2050 in the advanced scenario,  around 500 tWh for hydrogen and 950 tWh for synthetic liquid  fuel generation for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  efficiency gains in the heating sector are very large as well.  Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios, consumption  equivalent to about 15,500 PJ/a is avoided through efficiency  gains by 2050 compared to the reference scenario. as a  result of energy-related renovation of the existing stock of  residential buildings, the introduction of low energy standards  and ‘passive climatisation’ for new buildings, as well as highly  efficient air conditioning systems, enjoyment of the same  comfort and energy services will be accompanied with much  lower future energy demand.    6.10.2 electricity generation  the development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. this  trend will more than compensate for the phasing out of  nuclear power production in the energy [r]evolution  scenarios, continuously reducing the number of fossil fuelfired  power plants as well. By 2050, 87% of the electricity  produced in china will come from renewable energy sources  in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario. ‘new’ renewables –  mainly wind, Pv, csP and geothermal energy – will contribute  58% to the total electricity generation. already by 2020 the  share of renewable electricity production will be 26% and  44% by 2030. the installed capacity of renewables will reach  about 1,520 gW in 2030 and 3,410 gW by 2050.  a 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the advanced scenario leads to around 4,740 gW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  table 6.10.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies in china over time. Up to 2020 wind  and Pv will become the main contributors to the growing  market share. after 2020, the continuing growth of wind and  Pv will be complemented by electricity from solar thermal,  geothermal and ocean energy. the energy [r]evolution  scenarios will lead to a high share of fluctuating power  generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of already 21% to  23% by 2030 and up to 47% by 2050. therefore, smart grids,  demand side management (dsm), energy storage capacities  and other options need to be expanded in order to increase  the flexibility of the power system for grid integration, load  balancing and a secure supply of electricity.  176    6.10.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.10.6 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both energy [r]evolution scenarios  decreases the future costs of electricity generation compared  to the reference scenario already by 2020. this difference in  full cost of generation will be in 2030 already 1.0 Us$ct/kWh  in the basic energy [r]evolution and 0.6 Us$ct/kWh in the  advanced scenario, without taking into account integration  costs for storage or other load-balancing measures. Because  of increasing prices for conventional fuels, electricity  generation costs will become economically favourable  starting in 2020 under the energy [r]evolution scenarios. By  2050, the cost will be 1.5/0.2 Us$ct/kWh, respectively, below  those in the reference case.  Under the reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total  electricity supply costs rising from today’s Us$ 311 billion per  year to more than Us$ 1,125 billion in 2050, compared to  Us$ 813 billion in the basic and Us$ 1,268 billion in the  advanced energy [r]evolution scenario. figure 6.10.6 shows  that both energy [r]evolution scenarios not only comply with  china´s co2 reduction targets, but also help stabilise energy  costs and relieve the economic pressure on society.  increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term costs for electricity supply that  are more than 28% lower in the basic energy [r]evolution  scenario than in the reference scenario. the advanced  scenario with 100% renewable power and an increase in  power generation of 10% results in supply costs 13% higher  than the reference case.  6.10.4 future investments in the power sector  around Us$ 8,470 billion is required in investment for the  energy [r]evolution scenario to become reality (including  investments for replacement after the economic lifetime of the  plants) - approximately Us$ 217 billion per year, Us$ 3,130  billion more than in the reference scenario (Us$ 5,340 billion).  investments for the advanced scenario add up to Us$ 12,430  billion until 2050, on average Us$ 319 billion per year,  including high investments in additional power plants for the  production of synthetic fuels. Under the reference scenario,  the levels of investment in conventional power plants add up  to almost 49% while approximately 51% would be invested in  renewable energies and cogeneration until 2050.  Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios, however, china  would shift up to 95% of the entire investment towards  renewables and cogeneration, respectively. By 2030, the  fossil fuel share of power sector investment would be focused  mainly on gas power plants.  Because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario reach a total  of Us$ 8,840 billion up to 2050, Us$ 227 billion per year. the  total fuel cost savings therefore would cover 280% of the  total additional investments compared to the reference  scenario. fuel cost savings in the advanced scenario are  even higher and add up to Us$ 9,610 billion, or Us$ 246  billion per year. renewable energy sources would then go on  to produce electricity without any further fuel costs beyond  2050, while costs for coal and gas will continue to be a  burden on national economies.    6.10.5 energy supply for heating  today, renewables meet around 19% of china’s energy  demand for heating, the main contribution coming from the  use of biomass. dedicated support instruments are required  to ensure a dynamic development in particular for renewable  technologies for buildings and renewable process heat  production. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  renewables already provide 34% of china’s total heat  demand in 2030 and 82% in 2050.  • energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating by 31% in 2050  (relative to the reference scenario), in spite of improving  living standards and economic growth.  • in the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • a shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  co2 emissions.  table 6.10.2 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating in china over time. Up to 2030  biomass remains the main contributor of the growing market  share. after 2030, the continuing growth of solar collectors  and a growing share of geothermal and environmental heat as  well as heat from renewable hydrogen will further reduce the  dependence on fossil fuels. the advanced scenario results in  a complete substitution of the remaining gas consumption by  hydrogen generated from renewable electricity.    6.10.6 future investments in the heating sector  also in the heating sector the energy [r]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment  strategies in heating technologies. in particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped  for the heating sector. the use of biomass for heating  purposes - often traditional biomass today - will be  substantially reduced in the energy [r]evolution scenarios  and replaced by more efficient and sustainable renewable  heating technologies.  renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to  very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems.  thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the energy  [r]evolution scenario in total requires around Us$ 3,310  billion to be invested in renewable heating technologies up to  2050 (including investments for replacement after the  economic lifetime of the plants) - approximately  Us$ 85 billion per year. the advanced scenario assumes an  even more ambitious expansion of renewable technologies  resulting in an average investment of around Us$ 86 billion  per year, while the main strategy in the scenario is the  substitution of the remaining natural gas amounts with  hydrogen or other synthetic fuels.  6,895 7,936 7,961  181  6.10.8 transport  in 2050, the car fleet in china will be significantly larger than  today. therefore a key target is the successful introduction of  highly efficient vehicle concepts. in addition, it is vital to shift  transport use to efficient modes like rail, light rail and buses,  especially in the expanding large metropolitan areas. along  with rising prices for fossil fuels, these changes reduce the  further growth in car sales projected under the reference  scenario. due to population increase, gdP growth and higher  living standards, energy demand from the transport sector is  expected to strongly increase in the reference scenario by  around 158% to 25,920 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario, efficiency measures and modal shifts  will save 50% (12,860 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the  reference scenario.  additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the advanced scenario of 61%  (15,940 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. By 2030, electricity will provide 8% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the energy  [r]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 46% (62% in the  advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the  transport sector. in 2050, up to 1,380 PJ/a of hydrogen is  used in the transport sector for the advanced energy  [r]evolution scenario.    6.10.10 development of co2 emissions  Whilst china’s emissions of co2 will increase by 58%  between 2012 and 2050 under the reference scenario, under  the energy [r]evolution scenario they will decrease from  8,230 million tonnes in 2012 to 1,319 million tonnes in 2050.  annual per capita emissions will drop from 5.9 tonne to  0.9 tonne. in spite of the abstinence of nuclear power  production and increasing power demand, co2 emissions will  decrease in the electricity sector. in the long run efficiency  gains and the increased use of renewable electricity in vehicles  strongly reduce emissions in the transport sector as well.  With a 40% share of co2, the industry sector will be the  largest source of emissions in 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. By 2050, china´s co2 emissions are  around 42% below 1990 levels in the energy [r]evolution  scenario while energy consumption is fully decarbonised in  the advanced case.  6.10.11 primary energy consumption  taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the energy  [r]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.10.12. Under the  basic energy [r]evolution] scenario, primary energy demand  will decrease by 20% from today’s 114,450 PJ/a to around  91,000 PJ/a. compared to the reference scenario, overall  primary energy demand will be reduced by 55% in 2050  under the energy [r]evolution scenario (reference scenario:  around 203,000 PJ in 2050). the advanced scenario results  due to additional conversion losses in a primary energy  consumption of around 95,300 PJ in 2050.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and  oil as fast as technically and economically possible by  expansion of renewable energies and a fast introduction of very  efficient vehicle concepts in the transport sector to replace oil  based combustion engines. this leads to an overall renewable  primary energy share of 23% in 2030 and 71% in 2050 in the  basic energy [r]evolution and of more than 92% in 2050 in the  advanced case (incl. non-energy consumption). in contrast to  the reference scenario, no new nuclear power plants will be  built in china in the energy [r]evolution scenarios.    6.11.1 final energy demand by sector  combining the projections on population development, gdP  growth and energy intensity results in future development  pathways for oecd asia oceania’s final energy demand.  these are shown in figure 6.11.1 for the reference and  energy [r]evolution scenarios. Under the reference scenario,  total final energy demand increases by 2% from the current  20,100 PJ/a to 20,600 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario, final energy demand decreases by 43%  compared to current consumption and is expected to reach  11,500 PJ/a by 2050. the advanced scenario results in some  additional reductions due to a higher share of electric cars.  Under both energy [r]evolution scenarios, due to economic  growth, increasing living standards and electrification of the  transport sector, overall electricity demand is expected to  increase despite efficiency gains in all sectors (see figure  6.11.2). total electricity demand will rise from about  1,650 tWh/a to 1,720 tWh/a by 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. compared to the reference scenario,  efficiency measures in the industry, residential and service  sectors avoid the generation of about 940 tWh/a.  6.11 oecd asia oceania  this reduction can be achieved in particular by introducing  highly efficient electronic devices using the best available  technology in all demand sectors. the transformation to a  carbon free energy system in the advanced scenario will  further increase the electricity demand in 2050 up to  1,900 tWh/a. electricity will become the major renewable  ‘primary’ energy, not only for direct use for various purposes  but also for the generation of synthetic fuels for fossil fuels  substitution. around 330 tWh are used in 2050 for electric  vehicles and rail transport in 2050 in the advanced scenario,  around 210 tWh for hydrogen and 220 tWh for synthetic liquid  fuel generation for the transport sector (excluding bunkers).  efficiency gains in the heating sector are large as well. Under  the energy [r]evolution scenarios, consumption equivalent to  about 3,000 PJ/a is avoided through efficiency gains by 2050  compared to the reference scenario. as a result of energyrelated  renovation of the existing stock of residential  buildings, the introduction of low energy standards and  ‘passive climatisation’ for new buildings, as well as highly  efficient air conditioning systems, enjoyment of the same  comfort and energy services will be accompanied by much  lower future energy demand.    6.11.2 electricity generation  the development of the electricity supply sector is  characterised by a dynamically growing renewable energy  market and an increasing share of renewable electricity. this  trend will more than compensate for the phasing out of nuclear  power production in the energy [r]evolution scenarios,  continuously reducing the number of fossil fuel-fired power  plants as well. By 2050, 95% of the electricity produced in  oecd asia oceania will come from renewable energy sources  in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario. ‘new’ renewables –  mainly wind, Pv, ocean and geothermal energy – will contribute  76% to the total electricity generation. already by 2020 the  share of renewable electricity production will be 28% and 58%  by 2030. the installed capacity of renewables will reach about  550 gW in 2030 and 870 gW by 2050.  a 100% electricity supply from renewable energy resources in  the advanced scenario leads to around 1,250 gW installed  generation capacity in 2050.  table 6.11.1 shows the comparative evolution of the different  renewable technologies in oecd asia oceania over time.  Until 2020 hydro will remain the main renewable power  source. after 2020, the continuing growth of wind and Pv will  be complemented by electricity from solar thermal,  geothermal and ocean energy. the energy [r]evolution  scenarios will lead to a high share of fluctuating power  generation sources (Pv, wind and ocean) of already 35% to  40% by 2030 and 61% to 66% by 2050. therefore, smart  grids, demand side management (dsm), energy storage  capacities and other options need to be expanded in order to  increase the flexibility of the power system for grid  integration, load balancing and a secure supply of electricity.    6.11.3 future costs of electricity generation  figure 6.11.6 shows that the introduction of renewable  technologies under both energy [r]evolution scenarios increases  the future costs of electricity generation compared to the  reference scenario until 2030. this difference in full cost of  generation will be less than 1.8 Us$ct/kWh in the basic energy  [r]evolution and about 2.1 Us$ct/kWh in the advanced scenario,  without taking into account integration costs for storage or other  load-balancing measures. Because of increasing prices for  conventional fuels and the lower co2 intensity of electricity  generation, electricity generation costs will become economically  favourable after 2040 under the energy [r]evolution scenarios.  By 2050, the cost will be 3.1/2.7 Us$ct/kWh, respectively, below  those in the reference case.  Under the reference scenario, on the other hand, growth in  demand and increasing fossil fuel prices result in total  electricity supply costs rising from today’s Us$ 183 billion per  year to more than Us$ 302 billion in 2050, compared to  Us$ 212 billion in the basic and Us$ 301 billion in the  advanced energy [r]evolution scenario. figure 6.11.6 shows  that both energy [r]evolution scenarios will help to comply  with oecd asia oceania´s co2 reduction targets, and  eventually will also help to stabilise energy costs.  increasing energy efficiency and shifting energy supply to  renewables lead to long term investment costs for electricity  supply that are more than 30% lower in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario than in the reference scenario. the  advanced scenario with 100% renewable power and an  increase in power generation of 24% results in supply costs  similar to the reference case.  6.11.4 future investments in the power sector  around Us$ 3,120 billion is required in investment for the energy  [r]evolution scenario to become reality (including investments  for replacement after the economic lifetime of the plants) -  approximately Us$ 80 billion per year, Us$ 650 billion more than  in the reference scenario (Us$ 2,480 billion). investments for  the advanced scenario sum up to Us$ 3,950 billion until 2050,  on average Us$ 101 billion per year. Under the reference  scenario, the levels of investment in conventional power plants  add up to almost 62% while approximately 38% would be  invested in renewable energies and cogeneration until 2050.  Under the energy [r]evolution scenarios, however, oecd  asia oceania would shift almost 88%/90% of the entire  investment towards renewables and cogeneration,  respectively. By 2030, the fossil fuel share of power sector  investment would be focused mainly on gas power plants.  Because renewable energy has no fuel costs, the fuel cost  savings in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario reach a total  of Us$ 2,170 billion up to 2050, Us$ 56 billion per year. the  total fuel cost savings therefore would cover 330% of the  total additional investments compared to the reference  scenario. fuel cost savings in the advanced scenario are  even higher and add up to Us$ 2,400 billion, or Us$ 62 billion  per year. renewable energy sources would then go on to  produce electricity without any further fuel costs beyond  2050, while costs for coal and gas will continue to be a  burden on national economies.    6.11.5 energy supply for heating  today, renewables meet around 5% of oecd asia oceania’s  energy demand for heating, the main contribution coming  from the use of biomass. dedicated support instruments are  required to ensure a dynamic development in particular for  renewable technologies for buildings and renewable process  heat production. in the basic energy [r]evolution scenario,  renewables already provide 35% of oecd asia oceania’s  total heat demand in 2030 and 93% in 2050.  • energy efficiency measures help to reduce the currently  growing energy demand for heating by 34% in 2050  (relative to the reference scenario), in spite of improving  living standards and economic growth.  • in the industry sector solar collectors, geothermal energy  (incl. heat pumps) as well as electricity and hydrogen from  renewable sources are increasingly substituting for fossil  fuel-fired systems.  • a shift from coal and oil to natural gas in the remaining  conventional applications leads to a further reduction of  co2 emissions.  table 6.11.8 shows the development of different renewable  technologies for heating in oecd asia oceania over time.  Biomass remains the main contributor, with increasing  investments in highly efficient modern biomass technology.  after 2030, a massive growth of solar collectors and a  growing share of geothermal and environmental heat as well  as heat from renewable hydrogen can further reduce the  dependence on fossil fuels. the advanced scenario results in  a complete substitution of the remaining gas consumption by  hydrogen generated from renewable electricity.    6.11.6 future investments in the heating sector  also in the heating sector the energy [r]evolution scenarios  would require a major revision of current investment  strategies in heating technologies. in particular, solar thermal,  geothermal and heat pump technologies need an enormous  increase in installations if these potentials are to be tapped  for the heating sector. the use of biomass for heating  purposes will shift from often traditional biomass today to  modern, efficient and environmentally friendly heating  technologies in the energy [r]evolution scenarios.  renewable heating technologies are extremely variable, from  low tech biomass stoves and unglazed solar collectors to  very sophisticated enhanced geothermal and solar systems.  thus, it can only be roughly estimated that the energy  [r]evolution scenario in total requires around Us$ 720 billion  to be invested in renewable heating technologies up to 2050  (including investments for replacement after the economic  lifetime of the plants) - approximately Us$ 18 billion per year.  the advanced scenario assumes an equally ambitious  expansion of renewable technologies assuming a slightly  higher share of direct electric heating, while the main strategy  in the scenario is the substitution of the remaining natural gas  amounts with electricity, hydrogen or other synthetic fuels.    6.11.8 transport  a key target in oecd asia oceania is to introduce incentives  for people to drive smaller cars and buy new, more efficient  vehicle concepts. in addition, it is vital to shift transport use  to efficient modes like rail, light rail and buses, especially in  the expanding large metropolitan areas. along with rising  prices for fossil fuels, these changes reduce the further  growth in car sales projected under the reference scenario.  despite population increase, gdP growth and higher living  standards, energy demand from the transport sector is  expected to decrease in the reference scenario by around  25% to 4,400 PJ/a in 2050. in the basic energy [r]evolution  scenario, efficiency measures and modal shifts will save 40%  (1,780 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  additional modal shifts and technology switches lead to even  higher energy savings in the advanced scenario of 50%  (2,180 PJ/a) in 2050 compared to the reference scenario.  Highly efficient propulsion technology with hybrid, plug-in  hybrid and battery-electric power trains will bring about large  efficiency gains. By 2030, electricity will provide 12% of the  transport sector’s total energy demand in the energy  [r]evolution, while in 2050 the share will be 45% (53% in the  advanced scenario). Hydrogen and other synthetic fuels  generated using renewable electricity are complementary  options to further increase the renewable share in the transport  sector. in 2050, up to 580 PJ/a of hydrogen is used in the  transport sector for the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario.    6.11.10 development of co2 emissions  Whilst oecd asia oceania’s emissions of co2 will decrease  by 22% between 2012 and 2050 under the reference  scenario, under the energy [r]evolution scenario they will  decrease from 2,210 million tonnes in 2012 to 85 million  tonnes in 2050. annual per capita emissions will drop from  10.9 tonne to 0.4 tonne. in spite of the abstinence of nuclear  power production and increasing power demand, co2  emissions will decrease in the electricity sector. in the long  run efficiency gains and the increased use of renewable  electricity in vehicles strongly reduce emissions in the  transport sector as well.  With a 29% share of co2, the industry sector will be the  largest source of emissions in 2050 in the basic energy  [r]evolution scenario. By 2050, oecd asia oceania´s co2  emissions are around 95% below 1990 levels in the energy  [r]evolution scenario while energy consumption is fully  decarbonised in the advanced case.  6.11.11 primary energy consumption  taking into account the assumptions discussed above, the  resulting primary energy consumption under the energy  [r]evolution scenarios is shown in figure 6.11.12. Under the  basic energy [r]evolution scenario, primary energy demand  will decrease by 47% from today’s 35,800 PJ/a to around  19,000 PJ/a. compared to the reference scenario, overall  primary energy demand will be reduced by 48% in 2050  under the energy [r]evolution scenario (reference scenario:  around 36,000 PJ in 2050). the advanced scenario results  due to additional conversion losses in a primary energy  consumption of around 20,900 PJ in 2050.  the energy [r]evolution scenarios aim to phase out coal and  oil as fast as technically and economically possible by  expansion of renewable energies and a fast introduction of  very efficient vehicle concepts in the transport sector to  replace oil based combustion engines. this leads to an  overall renewable primary energy share of 35% in 2030 and  81% in 2050 in the basic energy [r]evolution and of more  than 89% in 2050 in the advanced case (incl. non-energy  consumption). in contrast to the reference scenario, no new  nuclear power plants will be built in oecd asia oceania in the  energy [r]evolution scenarios.    e m p loy m e n t p r o j e ct i o n s -  m e t h o d o lo gy a n d a s s u m p t i o n s  image hundreds of salt lakes are sprinkled across the landscape of northern and western australia. most, including lake mackay, fill infrequently via seasonal rainfall that runs off  of nearby lands and through minor drainage channels. water can persist in lake mackay for at least six months after a flood; when it does, the ephemeral lake provides an important  habitat and breeding area for shorebirds and waterbirds  employment factors regional adjustments  just transition:  investment in  education rather  than fossil fuels”  “    the institute for sustainable futures at the University of  technology sydney modelled the effects of the reference  scenario and advanced energy {r]evolution scenario on jobs  in the energy sector. this section provides a simplified  overview of how the calculations were performed. a detailed  methodology is also available.1 chapters 6 and 7 contain all  the data on how the scenarios were developed. the main  inputs to the calculations are:  for each scenario, namely the reference (business as usual)  and advanced energy [r]evolution scenario:  • the amount of electrical and heating capacity that will be  installed each year for each technology.  • the primary energy demand for coal, gas, and biomass  fuels in the electricity and heating sectors.  • the amount of electricity generated per year from nuclear,  oil, and diesel.  for each technology:  • employment factors’, or the number of jobs per unit of capacity,  separated into manufacturing, construction, operation and  maintenance, and per unit of primary energy for fuel supply.  • for the 2020, 2025, and 2030 calculations, a ‘decline factor’  for each technology which reduces the employment factors by  a certain percentage per year. this reflects the fact that  employment per unit falls as technology efficiencies improve.  for each region:  • the percentage of local manufacturing and domestic fuel  production in each region, in order to calculate the  proportion of manufacturing and fuel production jobs which  occur in the region.  • the percentage of world trade which originates in each region  for coal and gas fuels, and renewable traded components.  • a “regional job multiplier”, which indicates how labour-intensive  economic activity is in that region compared to  the oecd. this is used to adjust oecd employment  factors where local data is not available.  the electrical capacity increase and energy use figures from  each scenario are multiplied by the employment factors for  each of the technologies, and then adjusted for regional labour  intensity and the proportion of fuel or manufacturing which  occurs locally. the calculation is summarised in the figure 7.1.    [number of years after 2015]  a range of data sources are used for the model inputs,  including the international energy agency, Us energy  information administration, BP statistical review of World  energy, Us national renewable energy laboratory,  international labour organisation, World Bank, industry  associations, national statistics, company reports, academic  literature, and isf’s own research.  these calculations only take into account direct  employment, for example the construction team needed to  build a new wind farm. they do not cover indirect  employment, for example the extra services provided in a  town to accommodate the construction team.  the calculations do not include jobs in energy efficiency,  although these are likely to be substantial, as the energy  [r]evolution leads to a 34% drop in primary energy demand  in the heating and electricity sectors at 2030.  the large number of assumptions required to make  calculations mean that employment numbers are indicative  only, especially for regions where little data exists. However,  within the limits of data availability, the figures presented are  representative of employment levels under the two scenarios.  7.1 employment factors  “employment factors” are used to calculate how many jobs  are required per unit of electrical or heating capacity, or per  unit of fuel. they take into account jobs in manufacturing,  construction, operation and maintenance and fuel. table 7.1  lists the employment factors used in the calculations. these  factors are usually from oecd countries, as this is where  there is most data, although local factors are used wherever  possible. for job calculations in non oecd regions, a regional  adjustment is used where a local factor is not available.  employment factors were derived for every region for coal  supply, because coal is currently so dominant in the global  energy supply, and because employment per tonne varies so  much by region. in australia and the Us coal is extracted at  an average of more than 8,000 tonnes3 per person per year,  while in europe the average coal miner is responsible for less  than 1,000 tonnes per year. india, china, and eastern  europe/eurasia have relatively low productivity at present,  with 600-700 tonnes per worker per year, but annual  increases in productivity are very high. the projections in coal  mining employment take into account the trend in  196      productivity in india, china, and russia. data for the the last  7 to 15 years were used to calculate an annual improvement  trend, which has been used to derive an annual percentage  reduction in the employment factors for coal mining over the  study period.  local data is also used for gas extraction for every region  except india, the middle east and other (non-oecd) asia.  the calculation of coal and gas employment per PJ draws on  data from national statistics and company reports, combined  with production figures from the BP statistical review of  World energy 20154 or other sources. data was collected for  as many major coal producing countries as possible,with  coverage obtained for 90% of world coal production  7.2 regional adjustments  7.2.1 regional job multipliers  the employment factors used in this model for energy  technologies other than coal mining are most often for oecd  regions, which are typically wealthier. a regional multiplier is  applied to make the jobs per mW more realistic for other parts  of the world. in developing countries it typically means more  jobs per unit of electricity because those countries have more  labour intensive practices. the multipliers change over the  study period in line with the projections for gdP per worker.  this reflects the fact that as prosperity increases, labour  intensity tends to fall. the multipliers are shown in table 7.3.  7.2.2 local employment factors  local employment factors are used where possible. region  specific factors are:  • oecd north america: gas and coal fuel, Pv and offshore wind  (all factors), and solar thermal power (construction and o&m).  • other europe: gas and coal fuel, offshore wind (all factors), solar  thermal power (construction and o&m), and solar heating.  • oecd asia oceania: gas and coal fuel.  • africa: gas, coal and biomass fuel.  • china: gas and coal fuel, and solar heating.  • eastern europe/eurasia: gas and coal fuel.  • other (non-oecd) asia: coal fuel.  • india: coal fuel, and solar heating.  • latin america: coal and biomass fuels, onshore wind (all  factors), nuclear (construction and o&m), large hydro  (o&m) and small hydro (construction and o&m).    local manufacturing and fuel production  some regions do not manufacture the equipment needed for  installation of renewable technologies, for example wind  turbines or solar Pv panels. the model takes into account a  projection of the percentage of renewable technology which  is made locally. the jobs in manufacturing components for  export are counted in the region where they originate. the  same applies to coal and gas fuels, because they are traded  internationally, so the model shows the region where the jobs  are actually located.  learning adjustments or ‘decline factors’  these account for the projected reduction in the cost of  renewable over time, as technologies and companies become  more efficient and production processes are scaled up.  generally, jobs per mW would fall in parallel with this trend. the  cost projections for each region in the energy [r]evolution  scenarios have been used to derive these factors.  198    7  199  7.3 employment results by technology  7.3.1 employment in fossil fuels and nuclear energy  employment in coal  Jobs in the coal sector drop significantly in both the  reference scenario and the advanced energy [r]evolution  scenario. in the reference scenario coal employment drops  by 2 million jobs between 2020 and 2030, despite generation  from coal nearly doubling. coal employment in 2015 was  close to 9.8 million, so this is in addition to a loss of 0.1  million jobs from 2015 to 2020.  this is because employment per ton in coal mining is falling  dramatically as efficiencies increase around the world. for  example, one worker in the new chinese ‘super mines’ is  expected to produce 30,000 tonnes of coal per year,  compared to current average productivity across all mines in  china of about 600 tonnes per year, and average productivity  per worker in north america of close to 9,000 tonnes.  Unsurprisingly, employment in the coal sector in the advanced  energy [r]evolution scenario falls even more between 2020  and 2030, reflecting reduction in coal generation from 34% to  16% of all generation, on top of the increase in efficiency.  coal jobs in both scenarios include coal used for heat supply.  employment in gas, oil & diesel  employment in the gas, oil and diesel sectors increases by  12% in the reference scenario, despite corresponding  generation in gas, oil and diesel increasing by 29%. this  reflects increasing efficiencies in the sector. in the advanced  energy [r]evolution scenario, employment and generation  remains relatively stable, just above 2015 levels. gas sector  jobs in both scenarios include heat supply jobs from gas.  employment in nuclear energy  employment in nuclear energy falls by 15% in the reference  scenario between 2020 and 2030, while generation increases  by 14%. in the advanced energy [r]evolution generation is  reduced by 70% between 2020 and 2030, representing a  virtual phase out of nuclear power. employment in the energy  [r]evolution scenario increases slightly, and in 2020 and 2030  is very similar in both scenarios. this is because jobs in  nuclear decommissioning replace jobs in generation. it is  expected these jobs will persist for 20 - 30 years.  energy    7.3.2 employment in wind energy and biomass  employment in wind energy  in the advaced energy [r]evolution scenario, wind energy  provides 21% of total electricity generation by 2030, and  employs 8.2 million people. growth is much more modest in  the reference scenario, with wind energy providing 5% of  generation, and employing only 0.6 million people.  employment in biomass  in the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario, biomass  provides 5.4% of total electricity generation by 2030, and  employs 11.5 million people. in the reference scenario,  biomass provides a smaller share of electricity, (2.9%), but  employs 11.8 million people, sllightly more than in the  advanced energy [r]evolution scenario. Jobs in heating from  biomass fuels are also included here.  200      7.3.3 employment in geothermal and wave power  employment in geothermal power  in the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario, geothermal  power would provide 2% of total electricity generation by 2030,  and would employ 386 thousand people. Growth is much more  modest in the reference scenario, with geothermal power  providing less than 1% of generation, and employing only 34  thousand people.  employment in wave and tidal power  in the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario, wave and tidal  power would provide 1% of total electricity generation by  2030, and would employ 652 thousand people. Growth is  much more modest in the reference scenario, with wave and  tidal power providing less than 0.1% of generation, and  employing only 14 thousand people.    652  7.3.4 employment in solar photovoltaics and solar  thermal power  employment in solar photovoltaics  in the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario, solar  photovoltaic would provide 14% of total electricity generation  by 2030, and would employ 10.3 million people. Growth is  much more modest in the reference scenario, with solar  photovoltaic providing less than 2% of generation, and  employing only 0.7 million people.  employment in solar thermal power  in the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario, solar thermal  power would provide 7% of total electricity generation by  2030, and would employ 2.7 million people. Growth is much  lower in the reference scenario, with solar thermal power  providing only 0.2% of generation, and employing only  80 thousand people.  202    7    7.3.5 employment in the renewable heating sector  employment in the renewable heating sector  employment in the renewable heat sector includes jobs in  installation, manufacturing, and fuel supply. this analysis  includes only jobs associated with fuel supply in the biomass  sector, and jobs in installation and manufacturing for direct  heat from solar, geothermal and heat pumps. it is therefore  likely to be an underestimate of jobs in this sector.  employment in solar heating  in the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario, solar heating  would provide 9% of total heat supply by 2030, and would  employ 5.6 million people. Growth is much more modest in  the reference scenario, with solar heating providing just over  1% of heat suuply, and employing only 0.3 million people.  employment in geothermal and heat pump heating  in the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario, geothermal  and heat pump heating would provide 7% of total heat supply  by 2030, and would employ 1.5 million people. Growth is  much more modest in the reference scenario, with  geothermal and heat pump heating providing less than 1% of  heat supply, and employing only 37 thousand people.  employment in biomass heat  in the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario, biomass heat  would provide 24% of total heat supply by 2030, and would  employ 5.5 million people. Growth is slightly less in the  reference scenario, with biomass heat providing 18% of heat  supply, and employing 5.1 million people.    t h e s i l e n t e n e r gy m a r k e t [ r ] e v o lu t i o n  image tunisia’s second largest city, sfax. sfax is a major port and home to tunisia’s largest fishing fleet. the most recognizable features of sfax from space are the brilliantly colored  salt ponds south of the old city and the new circular earth works of the taparura redevelopment project just to the north.  the power plant  market 1970 to 2014  the global market shares  in the power plant market:  renewables gaining ground  the first decade:  the development of the  renewable power plant market  the global renewable  energy market in 2014  renewables  gained the  largest market  share in 2014”  “    8.1 the power plant market 1970 to 2011  an analysis of the global power plant market of the past 45  years shows that since the late 1990s, wind and solar  installations grew faster than any other power plant  technology across the world - about 533,000 mW total  capacity between 2000 and 2014. including all other  renewable power technologies (hydro, biomass,  concentrated solar and geothermal), a total of 894,000 mW  of new capacity has been connected to the grid. however, it  is too early to claim the end of the fossil fuel based power  generation, because during the same timeframe, almost the  same amount of new coal power plants – approx. 840,000  mW – were built with embedded cumulative emissions of  around 100 billion tonnes co2 over their technical lifetime.  the global market volume of renewable energy in 2014 was,  for the first time ever, higher than the global net addition of  fossil fuel capacity (ren21-2015).1 there is a window of  opportunity for new renewable energy installations to replace  old plants in oecd countries and for electrification in  developing countries. however, the window will close within  the next few years without good renewable energy policies –  especially in regard to priority grid access and dispatching -  and legally binding co2 reduction targets.  between 1970 and 1990, the global power plant market in the  oecd2 was dominated by countries that electrified their  economies mainly with coal, gas and hydro power plants. the  power sector was largely in the hands of state-owned and  investor owned utilities with regional or nationwide supply  monopolies. the nuclear industry had a relatively short period of  steady growth between 1970 and the mid-1980s - with a peak  in 1985, one year before the chernobyl accident - and went into  decline in following years, with no signs of growth since then.  between 1990 and 2000, the global power plant industry  went through a series of changes. While oecd countries  began to liberalise their electricity markets, electricity  demand did not match previous growth, so fewer new power  plants were built. capital-intensive projects with long  payback times, such as coal and nuclear power plants, were  unable to get sufficient financial support. it was the decade of  gas power plants.    the economies of developing countries, especially in asia,  started growing during the 1990s, triggering a new wave of  power plant projects. similarly to the us and europe, most of  the new markets in the ‘tiger states’ of southeast asia partly  deregulated their power sectors. a large number of new  power plants in this region were built by independent power  producer (ipps), who sell the electricity mainly to stateowned  utilities. the majority of new power plant technology in  liberalised power markets is fuelled by gas except in china,  which focused on building new coal power plants. about 75%  of all new coal power plants worldwide between 2000 and  2014 were built in china. in 2014, the first signs that the end  of aggressive coal expansion might end appeared: the  national bureau of statics of china (nbsc 2015)3 revealed  that the thermal power generation in the first quarter of 2015  was down 3.7%, hydropower generation up 17% and “other”  power generation (mainly wind, solar and nuclear) was up  18% on year. total energy consumption only grew 1% and  total electricity consumption was stable. furthermore, gasfired  capacity grew by 20% during 2014, and coal-power  generation fell more than 4%; the overall coal consumption  for the power sector declined by as much as 5%.    8.1.1 power plant markets in the us, europe and china  the graphs show how much electricity market liberalisation  influences the choice of power plant technology. While the us  and european power sectors moved towards deregulated  markets, which favour mainly gas power plants and  increasingly onshore wind, china added large quantities of  power generation capacities of various technologies. besides  coal, there was a double digit GW market volume (over  10,000 mW of new capacity per year) for wind and hydro and  – since 2013 – solar photovoltaics as well. china was the  largest market for pv installations in 2013 and 2014 with no  signs of decline in the near future.  Us: liberalisation of the us power sector started with the  energy policy act 1992 and became a game changer for the  whole sector. in 2015, the us in is still far away from a fully  liberalised electricity market, but the effect has been a shift  from coal and nuclear towards gas and wind, with a slowly  but steadily growing solar photovoltaic market. the economic  backbone of the growing onshore wind market has been the  Production Tax Credit (ptc) during the past years. the  federal renewable electricity production tax credit (ptc) is a  per-kWh tax credit for electricity generated by qualified  energy resources and sold by the taxpayer to an unrelated  person during the taxable year. originally enacted in 1992,  the ptc has been changed numerous times, most recently in  january 2013 (usa – energy.gov 2015).4  the impact of the ptc on the usa wind market is significant.  the united states ranked third for global wind market  additions (nearly 4.9 GW), second for cumulative capacity at  year’s end (65.9 GW), and first for wind power generation  (181.8 tWh) during 2014. the us market rebounded with a  record 13 GW under construction as of early 2015. texas led  for capacity added (more than 1.8 GW), followed by  oklahoma, iowa, Washington, and colorado. the federal  ptc, which expired at the end of 2013, was reinstated  retroactively in mid-december 2014. the solar photovoltaic  market grows mainly due because grid parity has been  reached. net-metering and gird connection regulations are of  vital importance for future solar growth.  references    europe: about five years after the us began deregulating the  power sector, the european community started a similar  process with similar effect on the power plant market.  investors backed fewer new power plants and extended the  lifetime of the existing ones. new coal and nuclear power  plants have had a market share of well below 10% for new  projects since then. the growing share of renewables,  especially wind and solar photovoltaics, is due to a legally  binding target and the associated feed-in laws in force in  many member states of the european community since the  late 1990s. overall, new installed power plant capacity  jumped to a record high because the aged power plant fleet  in europe needed re-powering. in 1997, the eu established a  renewable energy target of 20% by 2020. by mid-2015, it  had become clear that this target will be most likely reached  and that further energy policy changes – especially for  infrastructure – are required. europe´s grid infrastructure and  many power plants are ageing, and major investment  decisions are being taken. in october 2014, eu leaders  agreed on rather low renewable energy and energy efficiency  targets for 2030. the target for a minimum 27 per cent share  of renewables across europe ignores the potential for  renewables to supply almost half of europe’s energy by 2030  and might have a negative impact of the future renewable  power market in europe.    china: the steady economic growth in china since the late  1990s and the growing power demand led to an explosion of  the coal power plant market, especially after 2002. in 2013,  the market hit a new peak year for new coal power plants:  75% of new coal power plants built worldwide since 2000  were in china. at the same time, china is trying to take its  dirtiest plants offline; between 2006 and 2010, a total of  76,825 mW of small coal power plants were phased out  under the 11th five year programme. While coal still  dominates new added capacity, wind power is rapidly  growing as well. starting in 2003, the wind market doubled  each year to over 18,000 mW5 by 2010, constituting 49% of  the global wind market. the chinese wind market declined to  12,960 mW in 2012 and increased again to 23,200 mW in  2014. hydro power plants maintain a large market share for  new installations: around 150,000 mW of new capacity has  been added, increasing the total installed capacity for hydro  to 280,000 mW in china. solar photovoltaic is starting to play  an increasing role with regard to newly installed capacity;  10,600 mW was added in 2014 alone; since 2011, china has  added the same capacity of pv as Germany – the world  leader – since 1994. future expansion of renewables  depends especially on grid regulation as access to the power  grid is the economic basis for renewables.  references  5 While the official statistic of the Global and chinese Wind industry associations (GWec/creia) adds up to  18,900 mW for 2010, the national enerGy bureau speaks about 13,999 mW. the differences betWeen sources  are due to the time of Grid connection, as some turbines Were installed in the last months of 2010 but  only connected to the Grid in 2011. these effects also miGht arise in the folloWinG year till 2014.    plant market: renewables gaining ground  since 2000, the wind power market gained a growing market  share within the global power plant market. initially only a  handful of countries, namely Germany, denmark and spain,  dominated the wind market, but the wind industry now has  projects in over 100 countries around the world. the solar  photovoltaic industry has experienced similar growth since  2005. between 2000 and 2014, 38% of all new power plants  worldwide were renewable-powered – mainly wind (15.8%)  and pv (8.4%), while 22% were gas power plants and 34%  coal. thus around 60% of all new power plants installed  globally are gas power plants and renewable, with close to  one-third as coal. nuclear remains irrelevant on a global scale  with just 1% of the global market share for new builds.  the energy revolution has started on a global level already.  this picture becomes even clearer when we look into the  global market shares but exclude china, the only country with  a massive expansion of coal. about 43% of all new power  plants since 2000 have been renewables and 37% have been  gas power plants (80% gas + re in total). coal gained a  market share of only 12.5% globally, excluding china. the  usa and europe installed 44% and 59% of renewables,  respectively, and 44% and 36% of gas power plants since  2000. thus new renewables and gas power are the  dominating power generation technologies, replacing coal  and nuclear and putting both regions on a low-carbon  pathway.    8.3 the first decade: the development of the  renewable power plant market  the renewable energy network for the 21st century (ren21)  published its 10th in-depth analysis of the Global renewable  energy market analysis – “renewables 2015 – Global status  report” in june 2015. With the friendly permission of ren21,  this section summarize the main findings of this analysis with  regard to renewable power markets and their status in 2014.  8.3.1 the renewable power sector in 2014 -  ren21’s analysis  in 2014, most renewable energy projects were developed in  the power sector. including hydropower, which rose by 3.6  percent to around 1,055 GW, renewable electricity capacity  increased worldwide to approximately 1,712 GW by the end  of 2014. most of the growth came from non-hydro  renewables, which grew by almost 18 percent to an  estimated 660 GW. pv and wind posted record capacity  additions exceeding new hydropower; taken together, pv and  wind made up more than 90 percent of non-hydro added  capacity in 2014.  including fossil and nuclear additions, renewables still made  up around 59 percent of the global market, with several  countries posting far higher shares. by the end of 2014, 27.7  percent of global generation capacity was renewable, enough  to cover 22.8 percent of global power demand, 16.6 percent  of which was hydropower. renewable electricity production is  also growing faster than demand. from 2007-2012,  electricity consumption grew worldwide by 2.7 percent on  average, while renewable power generation increased at an  annual rate of 5.9 percent. While electricity consumption in  non-oecd countries grew twice as fast as that average,  these countries now make up roughly half of investments in  renewable energy.  variable renewables – pv and wind – have also reached high  levels of penetration in numerous countries. in 2014, wind power  covered 39 percent of power demand in denmark, 27 percent in  portugal, and 21 percent in nicaragua. the highest performers  with pv were italy at 7.9 percent of electricity demand, Greece  at 7.6 percent, and Germany at seven percent.  the leading countries for total installed renewable power  generation capacity at the end of 2014 were china, the  united states, brazil, Germany, and canada. roughly a  quarter of the world’s renewable power capacity was located  in china, including some 280 GW of hydropower. excluding  hydropower, the leading countries were china, the united  states, and Germany, followed by four countries roughly at  the same level: italy, spain, japan, and india. the top 20  countries for non-hydro renewable power capacity per capita  were all in europe. denmark was far and away the leader,  followed by Germany, sweden, spain, and portugal.  outside china – which added the most wind, solar, and  hydropower capacity of any country in the world – there was  significant market growth elsewhere in asia. for instance,  thailand added 0.5 GW of pv – more than many european  countries – and significant wind power capacity was built in  the philippines and pakistan.  renewables made up 78 percent of new generation capacity  in the european Union, roughly the level of the past seven  years. in Germany, the share of non-hydro renewable  electricity grew from 10.5 percent in 2010 to 24 percent in  2014. in scotland, renewables covered nearly half of  electricity demand.  in north america, pv and wind continued to grow strongly,  though the continent has hardly its tremendous resources.  more renewable generation capacity was built than gas  capacity in the us, and for the first time non-hydro resources  produced more electricity than hydropower.  brazil continues to be the leader with renewables in latin  america and the caribbean. more than 3 GW of hydropower  capacity was added in 2014 along with a record 2.5 GW of  wind power. but chile and mexico also ramped up wind and  pv significantly, while uruguay added the most wind power  capacity per capita worldwide.  in africa, south africa came in ninth worldwide for solar  markets, putting the continent in the top 10 for the first time  just ahead of india. south africa also led the continent in wind  installations. kenya built more than half of new global  geothermal capacity, and rwanda added at least 30 mW of  hydropower and an 8.5 mW pv plant.  in 2014, large renewable energy projects (more than one  megawatt) owned by utilities and key investors continued to  dominate global renewable energy production. but australia,  europe, japan, and north america have also witnessed  significant growth in “prosumers” – power consumers who  also produce their own electricity. national dialogues were  held in france on how to support and manage this growing  group, as did the european union. in both developed and  developing countries, industry also got a lot of the energy is  needed from biomass waste from agriculture and forestry.  development countries with quickly growing energy  consumption are developing renewables and fossil fuel  capacity simultaneously. in contrast, power consumption is  relatively stagnant in numerous oecd countries; they are,  renewable energy growth displaces existing generation.  some utilities and power providers in europe and north  america are therefore shedding fossil fuel investments and  taking on renewable energy assets – including acquiring other  utilities with such assets. some countries have passed laws  requiring utilities to come up with new business models and  upgrade grids for the integration of greater shares of  renewable electricity. india and africa in particular are  building transmission lines to areas with a lot of renewable  energy resources.    community energy co-ops also grew further in 2014,  especially for pv. the first community-owned ocean energy  system was built in scotland, and community projects have  also gone up from thailand to nova scotia. denmark and  Germany have the strongest tradition of local ownership of  renewable energy projects. as of 2012, 47 percent of  renewable energy investments came from citizens in  Germany, though that percentage has fallen since then.  in 2014, corporations and large institutions also increasingly  got on board. under the re100 initiative, a group of  companies pledged to reach 100 percent renewable energy.  the total amount that such firms independently invested in  renewables added up to billions of dollars. the mining  industry has also discovered renewable energy as a way of  reducing energy supply costs at remote locations. mines in  brazil, canada, chile, south africa, and tanzania now get  some of their heat and/or power from renewables.  traditional utilities are voluntarily purchasing renewable  energy, especially electricity, even outside of mandates. in  2013, Germany has 5.7 million residential customers  subscribing to 100 percent renewable electricity, up from 0.8  million in 2006. by now, nearly a sixth of private households  in the country purchase a total of around 20 tWh of  renewable electricity. additional commercial customers bring  green power purchases up to 30 tWh.  australia, canada, japan, south africa, and the united  states also have green power markets. more than half of  americans can subscribe to green power packages from their  utility. in the us, 5.4 million customers purchased 62 tWh  (roughly 1.7 percent of total us power sales) in 2013.  8.4 the global renewable energy market in 2014  the heating and cooling sectors have not grown as quickly as  renewable electricity. nonetheless, the market for solar  thermal collectors grew by nine percent. in contrast, bio-heat  remained nearly unchanged. heat markets often require  district heat networks, for instance, so the infrastructure  obstacles are greater. uncertain policies further impeded the  growth of this market.  electric mobility is moving quickly from a low level. in 2013,  the number of electric vehicles doubled to 665,000.  e- mobility and battery storage, whose cost is also rapidly  dropping, are likely to lead to a breakthrough for renewables  and transportation. biofuels continued to grow, though at a  slower pace; the main obstacle here is sustainability.  nonetheless, biofuels remain the primary source of renewable  fuel in the transport sector, growing by 8.4 percent to 123.7  billion liters in 2014 (ren21-2015).  table 8.1 shows the direct connection between strong  renewable energy policies and market growth. up to now,  countries with stable, effective policies have had the most  success. but as renewable energy becomes cost-competitive  and even cheaper than conventional energy, the focus of  policymaking will move away from financial incentives  towards infrastructure provision, permitting, and levelling the  playing field between incumbents and new players.    e n e r gy r e s o u r c e s a n d s e c u r i t y o f s u p p ly  image coastal lagoons with numerous rounded islands are typical of the indian ocean coastline of western australia. these shapes contrast with the angular, white ponds of the salt extraction  industry. the area has experienced more direct hits by cyclones than any other place on the western australia’s coastline. the repeated hits almost resulted in a decision to permanently evacuate the  small town of onslow (just outside the image). meanwhile, the monte bello islands offshore (just to the north of the image) are guarded as defunct sites of atomic bomb tests.  oil  the reserves chaos  non-conventional oil reserves  gas  shale gas  coal  nuclear  renewable energy  regional renewable  energy potential  greenpeace principles and  criteria for sustainable  bioenergy  the only  scarcity for  solar energy  is the lack of  political will”  “  he issue of supply security is at the top of the energy policy  agenda. concern is focused both on price security and the  security of physical supply for countries with none if their own  resources. in 2013, 78.3% of global final energy demand was  met by fossil fuels, while 19.1% came from renewable energy  sources and 2.6% from nuclear energy (iea 2014).1 the  unrelenting increase in energy demand conflicts with the finite  nature of these resources. at the same time, the global  distribution of oil and gas resources does not match the  distribution of demand. some countries have to rely almost  entirely on fossil fuel imports.  the Global energy assessment (Gea 2012)2 is an integrated  assessment of the global energy system to date, involving 300  authors and 200 reviewers worldwide, including scientists,  policy experts, and industry leaders. table 1 from that  publication shows estimated deposits and the current use of  fossil energy resources. there is obviously no shortage of fossil  fuels; there might be a shortage of conventional oil and gas, but  unconventional resources are still larger than our climate can  cope with. reducing global fossil fuel consumption for reasons  of resource scarcity alone is not mandatory, even though there  may be substantial price fluctuations and regional or structural  shortages as we have seen in the past.  the presently known coal resources and reserves alone  probably amount to around 3,000 times the amount currently  mined in a year. thus, in terms of resource potential, current level  demand could be met for many hundreds of years to come.  coal is also relatively evenly spread across the globe; each  continent holds considerable deposits. however, the supply  horizon is clearly much lower for conventional oil and gas  reserves at 40–50 years. if some resources or deposits currently  a the data reflect the ranges found in the literature; the distinction between reserves and resources is based on current (exploration and production) technology and market conditions. resource data  are not cumulative and do not include reserves.  b reserves, resources, and occurrences of uranium are based on once-through fuel cycle operation. closed fuel cycles and breeding technology would increase the uranium resource dimension  50-60 fold. thorium-based fuel cycles would enlarge the fissile-resource base further.  still classified as ‘unconventional’ are included, the resource  potentials exceed the current consumption rate by far more than  one hundred years. however, serious ecological damage is  frequently associated with fossil energy excavation, particularly  oil sands and shale oil.  over the past few years, new commercial processes have been  developed in the natural gas extraction sector, allowing more  affordable access to gas deposits previously considered  ‘unconventional’, many of which are more frequently found and  evenly distributed globally than traditional gas fields. however,  tight gas and shale gas extraction can potentially lead to seismic  activity and the pollution of groundwater basins and inshore  waters. it therefore needs special regulations. a global  distribution network for liquid gas already exists, in the form of  tankers and loading terminals, so an effective gas market is  expected to develop and that oil and gas prices will cease to be  linked. having more liquid gas in the energy mix (currently  around 10 % of overall gas consumption) significantly increases  supply security, such as by reducing the risks of supply  interruptions associated with international pipeline networks.  Gas hydrates are another type of gas deposit found in the form of  methane aggregates both in the deep sea and underground in  permafrost. they are solid under high pressure and low  temperatures. While there is the possibility of continued greenhouse  gas emissions from such deposits as a consequence of arctic  permafrost soil thaw or a thawing of the relatively flat siberian  continental shelf, there is also potential for extraction of this energy  source. many states, including the usa, japan, india, china and  south korea have launched relevant research programmes.  estimates of global deposits vary greatly; however, all are in the  zettajoule range, for example 70,000–700,000 ej (krey et al., 2009).    the Global energy assessment report estimates the theoretical  potential to be 2,496 – 2,772,889 ej (Gea, 2012), i.e. possibly  more than a thousand times greater than the current annual total  energy consumption. the wide range of this estimation shows the  high uncertainty how much of the existing reserves can really be  exploited. approximately a tenth (1,200–245,600 ej) is rated as  potentially extractable. however, the WbGu advised against  applied research for methane hydrate extraction, as mining bears  considerable risks and methane hydrates do not represent a  sustainable energy source (‘the future oceans’, WbGu, 2006).  9.1 the energy [r]evolution fossil fuel pathway  the energy [r]evolution scenario will phase-out fossil fuels  not simply as they are depleted, but faster as part of a  greenhouse gas reduction pathway required avoiding  dangerous climate change. Decisions about opening up  new oil, gas and coal mines lead almost certainly to a  “lock-in” situation: investments in new oil production will  make it more difficult to change to a renewable energy  pathway in the future.  the energy [r]evolution scenario development aims to  organise an energy transition without any new oil  exploration and production investments in the arctic or  deep sea wells. Unconventional oil such as canada´s tar  sands and australia´s shale oil is not needed to guarantee  the supply oil until it is phased out under the energy  [r]evolution scenario (see chapter 5).  9.1.1 oil  oil is the lifeblood of the modern global economy, as the  supply disruptions of the 1970s made clear. oil is the number  one source of energy, providing about one third of the world’s  needs and the fuel employed almost exclusively for essential  uses such as transportation. however, a passionate debate  has developed over the ability of supply to meet increasing  consumption, a debate obscured by poor information and  stirred by recent soaring prices.  the reserves chaos  public information about oil and gas reserves is strikingly  inconsistent, and potentially unreliable for legal, commercial,  historical and sometimes political reasons. the most widely  available and quoted figures, those from the industry journals  Oil & Gas Journal and World Oil have limited value as they  report the reserve figures provided by companies and  governments without analysis or verification. moreover, as  there is no agreed definition of reserves or standard reporting  practice, these figures usually represent different physical  and conceptual magnitudes. confusing terminology -  ‘proved’, ‘probable’, ‘possible’, ‘recoverable’, ‘reasonable  certainty’ - only adds to the problem. furthermore  estimations oil reserves changes sometimes within only a few  years significantly: While the bp statistical review estimated  the total global proven oil reserves by the end of 2010 at  1344 thousand million barrel (bp 2011)3 only 4 years later the  same source increased the estimation to 1701 thousand  million barrels (bp 2015).4    historically, private oil companies have consistently  underestimated their reserves to comply with conservative  stock exchange rules and for reasons of common business  prudence. Whenever a discovery was made, only a portion of  the geologist’s estimate of recoverable resources was  reported; subsequent revisions would then increase the  reserves from that same oil field over time. national oil  companies, mostly represented by opec (organisation of  petroleum exporting countries), have taken a very different  approach. they are not subject to any sort of accountability,  and their reporting practices are even less clear. in the late  1980s, the opec countries blatantly overstated their  reserves while competing for production quotas, which were  allocated as a proportion of the reserves. although some  revision was needed after the companies were nationalised,  between 1985 and 1990, opec countries increased their  apparent joint reserves by 82%. not only were these dubious  revisions never corrected, but many of these countries have  reported untouched reserves for years, even if no sizeable  discoveries were made and production continued at the same  pace. additionally, the former soviet union’s oil and gas  reserves have been overestimated by about 30% because the  original assessments were later misinterpreted.  Whilst private companies are now becoming more realistic  about the extent of their resources, the opec countries hold  by far the majority of the reported reserves, and their  information is as unsatisfactory as ever. their conclusions  should therefore be treated with considerable caution. fairly  estimating the world’s oil resources would require a regional  assessment of the mean backdated (i.e. ‘technical’)  discoveries.  non-conventional oil reserves  a large share of the world’s remaining oil resources is  classified as ‘non-conventional’. potential fuel sources such  as oil sands, extra heavy oil and oil shale are generally more  costly to exploit, and their recovery causes enormous  environmental damage. the reserves of oil sands and extra  heavy oil worldwide amount to an estimated 6 trillion barrels,  1 to 2 trillion of which are believed to be recoverable if the oil  price is high enough and the environmental standards low  enough.  one of the worst examples of environmental degradation  resulting from the exploitation of unconventional oil reserves  is the oil sands beneath the canadian province of alberta.  they constitute the world’s second-largest proven oil  reserves after saudi arabia. producing crude oil from these  ‘tar sands’ - a heavy mixture of bitumen, water, sand and clay  found beneath more than 54,000 square miles5 of old-growth  forest in northern alberta, an area the size of england and  Wales – releases up to four times more carbon dioxide, the  principal global warming gas, than conventional drilling does.  the booming oil sands industry will produce 100 million  tonnes of co2 a year (equivalent to a fifth of the uk’s entire  annual emissions) by 2012, ensuring that canada would have  missed its emission targets under the kyoto protocol. the oil  rush is also scarring a wilderness landscape: millions of  tonnes of plant life and top soil are scooped away in vast  opencast mines, with millions of litres of water diverted from  rivers. up to five barrels of water are needed to produce a  single barrel of crude, and the process requires huge  amounts of natural gas. it takes two tonnes of the raw sands  to produce a single barrel of oil.  furthermore the exploitation of tar sands is significantly more  expensive than conventional oil production. according to  university of michigan – center for sustainable systems (css  – 2014)6 the production cost of oil sands range between 6.6  and 13.1 $/Gj while conventional oil production costs are  estimated between 1.6 to 6.6 §/Gj. thus, tar sands ar only  economical when the price of conventional oil is high. these  production costs do not include the enormous environmental  and climate damages.  9.1.2 gas  natural gas has been the fastest growing fossil energy source  over the last two decades, boosted by its increasing share in  the electricity generation mix. Gas is generally regarded as an  abundant resource; public concerns about depletion are  limited to oil, even though few in-depth studies address the  subject. Gas resources are more concentrated, and a few  massive fields make up most of the reserves. the largest gas  field in the world holds 15% of the ultimate recoverable  resources (urr), compared to 6% for oil. unfortunately,  information about gas resources suffers from the same bad  practices as oil data because gas mostly comes from the  same geological formations, and the same stakeholders are  involved.  most reserves are initially understated and then gradually  revised upwards, giving an optimistic impression of growth.  by contrast, russia’s reserves, the largest in the world, are  considered to have been overestimated by about 30%. owing  to geological similarities, gas follows the same depletion  dynamic as oil, and thus the same discovery and production  cycles. in fact, existing data for gas is of worse quality than  for oil, with ambiguities arising over the amount produced,  partly because flared and vented gas is not always accounted  for. as opposed to published reserves, the technical ones  have been almost constant since 1980 because discoveries  have roughly matched production.    9.1.3 shale gas  natural gas production, especially in the united states, has  recently involved a growing contribution from nonconventional  gas supplies such as shale gas. conventional  natural gas deposits have a well-defined geographical area.  the reservoirs are porous and permeable, and the gas is  produced easily through a wellbore. it does not generally  require artificial stimulation (inGaa 2008).7  natural gas obtained from unconventional reserves (known as  “shale gas” and “tight gas”) requires the reservoir rock to be  fractured using a process known as hydraulic fracturing or  “fracking”. fracking is associated with a range of  environmental impacts, some of which are not fully  characterized or understood. in addition, it appears that the  greenhouse gas “footprint” of shale gas production may be  significantly greater than of conventional gas, possibly even  worse than of coal. in the us, the country with the highest  production of shale gas globally, experience shows a huge  negative environmental impact (css 2014). a single gas well  requires one to two hectares of land, in addition to road  networks. the drilling fluid, or “mud,” is used to cool the drill  bit, regulate pressure, and remove rock fragments. one well  may require hundreds of tonnes of mud and produce 100 to  550 tonnes of rock cuttings. furthermore, small to moderate  magnitude (<6) seismic activity has been linked to  underground injection of wastewater produced in oil and gas  operations, including a 5.3 and a 5.6 magnitude earthquake  in 2011 (css 2014).  research and investment in non-conventional gas resources  has increased significantly in recent years due to the rising  price of conventional natural gas. in some areas, the  technologies for economic production have already been  developed, in others it is still at the research stage. extracting  shale gas, however, usually goes hand in hand with  environmentally hazardous processes. even so, it is expected  to increase.  greenpeace opposes the exploitation of unconventional  gas reserves. these resources are not needed to guarantee  the needed gas supply under the energy [r]evolution  scenario.  218      9.1.4 coal  coal was the world’s largest source of primary energy until it  was overtaken by oil in the 1960s. today, coal supplies  almost one quarter of the world’s energy. however, it is the  biggest contributor of carbon emissions among all energy  sources, even ahead of oil. despite being the most abundant  of fossil fuels, coal’s development is currently threatened by  environmental concerns; hence, its future will unfold in the  context of both energy security and global warming.  coal is abundant and more equally distributed throughout the  world than oil and gas. Global recoverable reserves are the  largest of all fossil fuels, and most countries have at least  some. moreover, existing and prospective big energy  consumers like the us, china and india have been self-sufficient  in coal, but the situation has changed over the past  years. the usa is now a net exporter, while china is a net  importer of coal.  While hard coal is a widely used fuel, lignite or brown coal is  used only in 18 countries for power generation. this mirrors  the available resources. the total reserves for hard coal are  estimated with 18,246 ej (consumption 2013 132.6 ej/a),  while lignite reserves are estimated at 2,775 ej (consumption  2013 21.6 ej/a) (Gea 2012).  coal has been exploited on a large scale for two centuries, so  both the product and the available resources are well known;  no substantial new deposits are expected to be discovered.  extrapolating the demand forecast forward, the world will  consume 20% of its current reserves by 2030 and 40% by  2050. hence, if current trends are maintained, coal would still  last several hundred years.  9.1.5 nuclear  uranium, the fuel used in nuclear power plants, is a finite  resource whose economically available reserves are limited.  its distribution is almost as concentrated as oil and does not  match global consumption. five countries - canada,  australia, kazakhstan, russia and niger - control three  quarters of the world’s supply, while on canada and russia  operate their own nuclear power plants. as a significant user  of uranium, however, russia’s reserves will be exhausted  within ten years.  conventional uranium resources are defined as those  occurrences from which uranium is recoverable as a primary  product, a co-product, or an important by-product. uranium  reserves are periodically estimated by the oecd’s nuclear  energy agency (nea) and the international atomic energy  agency (iaea) with input from the World nuclear association  (Wna), the World energy council (Wec), and numerous  national geological institutions. nea-iaea estimates have the  widest coverage, so the reserves reported in their latest  survey (the so-called red book) are given here (nea/iaea,  2014). the two organizations define ‘identified reserves’ as  deposits that could be produced competitively in an  expanding market. until 2008, it included uranium  recoverable at less than 130 $/kgu. stimulated by high spot  prices of up to 350 $/kg in 2007 (Gea 2012), the 2010 edition  of the red book extended the cost ranges to 260 $/kgu,  which had not yet further been increased as of 2014 (oecdnea  2014).8  secondary sources, such as old deposits, currently make up  nearly half of worldwide uranium reserves. however, these  will soon be used up. mining capacities will have to be nearly  doubled in the next few years to meet current needs.  a joint report by the oecd nuclear energy agency and the  international atomic energy agency9 estimates that all  existing nuclear power plants will have used up their nuclear  fuel, employing current technology, within less than 70 years.  Given the range of scenarios for the worldwide development  of nuclear power, it is likely that uranium supplies will be  exhausted sometime between 2026 and 2070. this forecast  includes the use of mixed oxide fuel (mox), a mixture of  uranium and plutonium.    the maps on the following pages provide an overview of  the availability of different fuels and their regional  distribution. information in this chapter is based partly on  the report ‘plugging the gap’,10 as well as information from  the international energy agency´s world energy outlook  2014 and bp statistical review 2015.  map 1 oil / map 2: gas / map 3: coal / map 4: nuclear /  map 5: solar / map 6: wind  9.2 renewable energy  nature offers a variety of freely available options for  producing energy. their exploitation is mainly a question of  how to convert sunlight, wind, biomass or water into  electricity, heat or power as efficiently, sustainably and cost-effectively  as possible.  on average, the energy in the sunshine that reaches the earth  is about one kilowatt per square metre worldwide. according  to the ipcc special report renewables (srren),12 solar  energy reaches the earth at a rate 7,900 times greater than  current energy consumption. in one day, the earth gets  enough energy from the sun to satisfy the world’s current  energy requirements for twenty years, even before other  renewable energy sources such as wind and ocean energy  are taken into account. even though only a percentage of that  potential is technically accessible, there is still enough to  provide up to ten times more energy than the world currently  requires.  the Global energy assessment (Gea 2012) report provides a  slightly higher estimation of renewable energy resources  shown in table 9.5; however, both sources prove that the  availability of the resource on a global scale is not a  constraint.  box 9.2 | definition of types of energy resource  potential11  theoretical potential: the physical upper limit of the energy  available from a certain source. for solar energy, for example,  this would be the total solar radiation falling on a particular  surface.  conversion potential: derived from the annual efficiency of  the respective conversion technology, it is therefore not a  strictly defined value, since the efficiency of a particular  technology depends on technological progress.  technical potential: this takes into account additional  restrictions regarding the area realistically available for energy  generation. technological, structural and ecological  restrictions and legislative requirements are accounted for.  economic potential: the proportion of the technical potential  that can be utilised economically. biomass, for example, is  included if it can be exploited economically in competition  with other products and land uses.  sustainable potential: the potential of an energy source is  limited based on an evaluation of ecological and socioeconomic  factors.  220      the overall technical potential of renewable energy is several  times greater than current total energy demand. technical  potential is defined as the amount of renewable energy  output obtainable by full implementation of demonstrated  technologies or practices likely to develop. it takes into  account the primary resources, the socio-geographical  constraints and the technical losses in the conversion  process. the complexity of calculating renewable energy  potentials is particularly great because these technologies  are comparatively young and their exploitation involves  changes to the way in which energy is both generated and  distributed. the technical potential depends on a number of  uncertainties; for instance, a technology breakthrough could  have a dramatic impact, changing the technical potential  assessment within a very short time frame. further, because  of the speed of technology change, many existing studies are  based on out-of-date information. more recent data, such as  significantly increased average wind turbine capacity factors  and output, would increase the technical potentials still  further (sreen, may 2011).  a wide range of estimates is provided in the literature but  studies have consistently found that the total global technical  potential for renewable energy is substantially higher than  both current and projected future global energy demand.  solar has the highest technical potential amongst the  renewable sources, but substantial technical potential exists  for all forms (srren, may 2011).  taking into account the uncertainty of technical potential  estimates, figure 1 provides an overview of the technical  potential of various re resources in the context of current  global electricity and heat demand as well as global primary  energy supply. issues related to technology evolution,  sustainability, resource availability, land use and other factors  that relate to this technical potential are explored in the  relevant chapters. the regional distribution of technical  potential is addressed in chapter 10.  the various types of energy cannot necessarily be added  together to estimate a total, because each type was  estimated independently of the others (for example, the  assessment did not take into account land use allocation; for  instance, pv and concentrating solar power cannot occupy  the same space when a particular site is suitable for either).  Given the large unexploited resources, even without having  reached the full development limits of the various  technologies, it can be concluded that the technical potential  is not a limiting factor in the expansion of renewable energy  generation. it will not be necessary or desirable to exploit the  entire technical potential. implementation of renewable  energy has to respect sustainability criteria in order to  achieve a sound future energy supply. public acceptance is  crucial, especially bearing in mind that the decentralised  character of many renewable energy technologies will move  systems closer to consumers. Without public acceptance,  market expansion will be difficult or even impossible.    note biomass and solar are shown as primary energy due to their multiple uses. note that the figure is presented in logarithmic scale due to the wide range of assessed data.    in addition to the theoretical and technical potential  discussions, this report also considers the economic  potential of renewable energy sources, taking into account all  social costs and assuming perfect information (covered in  section 10.6) and the market potential of re sources. market  potential is defined in box 9.2, but the term often used in  different ways. the general understanding is that market  potential means the total amount of renewable energy that  can be implemented in the market, taking into account  existing and expected real-world market conditions (covered  in section 10.3) shaped by policies, availability of capital and  other factors, each of which is discussed in ar4 and defined  in annex i. the market potential may therefore in theory be  larger than the economic potential. to be realistic, however,  market potential analyses have to take into account the  behaviour of private economic agents under specific  prevailing conditions, which are of course partly shaped by  public authorities. the energy policy framework in a particular  country or region will have a profound impact on the  expansion of renewables.  before looking at the possible regional contribution renewable  energy can make, it is worth understanding the upper limits of  the regional potential of each source to develop an optimal mix  in terms of technical and economic circumstances.  222    9.3 greenpeace principles and criteria for  sustainable bioenergy  clearly, the biggest potential that the terrestrial environment  offers for climate change mitigation lie in a radical change in the  way we use land resources and not in just maximizing the  amount of biomass available to burn. strict criteria for bioenergy,  adequate policies, institutional frameworks and enforcement  capacities are needed to safeguard environmental, climate and  social benefits and ensure that this scarce resource is used in  the most effective manner. this must include the following  principles and criteria (in random order):  principles  • bioenergy production must not cause negative impacts on  the world’s natural capital, such as forests and other natural  ecosystems, biodiversity, soil fertility and water resources.  • bioenergy production must not cause negative impacts on  livelihoods, nor on people’s access to nutritious and healthy  food. land and water grabbing, land use conflicts and  other social conflicts must be prevented.  • bioenergy must not widen social inequalities between  developing and developed countries. international trade in  biomass or biofuels must not undermine food security.  production for local needs should take priority over  production for the global market.  • bioenergy production must be as resource efficient as  possible, and deliver significant reductions in greenhouse gas  emissions compared to fossil fuel-based energy systems.  • biomass must be utilized for energy following the  cascading use principle. under this principle biomass is  preferably used for maintaining soil fertility, food, feed and  materials that store carbon.13 bioenergy should not  compete with these sectors for biomass feedstock. policies  that incentivize the production of bioenergy (and thereby  create a market) must enhance instead of distort the  cascading use of biomass.  • in order to close nutrient cycles and reduce co2 emissions,  bioenergy should preferably be produced from regionally  available biomass and satisfy regional energy need.  • energy demand reductions must be prioritised so as to  reduce the volume of bioenergy required to secure a supply  of 100% renewable energy.  • biomass for bioenergy should preferably be utilized in  applications where it delivers the highest co2 savings.  • bioenergy for electricity should be used for dispatching and  not for large base load capacity.  criteria  greenhouse gas emissions  • any bioenergy project should replace energy produced from  fossil fuels. considering the entire production chain, aboveground  and below-ground carbon stock changes and any  indirect land use changes (iluc), the net greenhouse gas  emission reduction of such a project must be at least 50%  compared to a natural gas reference, 60% compared to an  oil reference and 70% compared to a coal reference. this net  emission reduction must be realized within 20 years.14  • Greenhouse gas emissions as a result of indirect land use  change (iluc) must be integrated in the greenhouse gas  calculation methodology of crops (including trees) for  bioenergy, grown on agricultural land, by determining cropspecific  iluc-factors.  • Whether commercial, non-commercial, diseased or fire-damaged,  standing trees from (semi)natural forests must  not be cut specifically for bioenergy because of the large  upfront carbon debt that is created.  • tree harvest levels in forests must not be increased as a  result of bioenergy production.  • land with a high carbon stock (forests, woodlands,  peatlands, grasslands) must not be converted.15, 16  biodiversity  • bioenergy production must not be extracted from high  conservation value areas (hcvas) and must not cause  direct or indirect destruction, conversion or degradation of  valuable ecosystems, such as forests, woodlands,  peatlands and grasslands.  • bioenergy production must not cause a loss of biodiversity  in agro-ecosystems.  • in forests that are managed for wood production, woody  biomass should only be used for bioenergy production if it  is proven to be sourced from responsibly managed forests  and plantations, equivalent to or exceeding the standard of  the forest stewardship council (fsc).17  • no deliberate release of genetically engineered (Ge)  organisms to the environment must be permitted. any  bioenergy crops, including trees, must not be Ge. Ge  microbes (including those developed by synthetic biology)  must only be used in securely-contained facilities.  references  13 Greenpeace does not necessarily value feed above enerGy. the livestock sector is larGely  unsustainable and should be stronGly decreased in most parts of the World. hoWever, the competition  effect of a policy driven bioenerGy market With the food and feed market lead to uncontrollable  neGative effects, mainly indirect land use chanGe (iluc), Which can undermine the environmental benefits  of bioenerGy.  14 the calculation must include emissions from cultivation, extraction, processinG, storaGe, transport,  and smokestack emissions (burninG biomass is not carbon neutral). When burninG biomass, the net  Greenhouse Gas emissions over a period of 20 years must be accounted for, aGainst the reference  scenario of not usinG the biomass for bioenerGy.  15 Grasslands store approximately 34% of the Global stock of carbon in terrestrial ecosystems While  forests store approximately 39%.  16 Greenpeace (2013), identifyinG hiGh carbon stock (hcs) forest for protection,    17 at this moment, only the fsc principles and criteria are sufficient to Guarantee responsible  manaGement of forests. see . this applies to all Wood products, Whether bioenerGy is  involved or not.  • crops and plantations must protect, conserve and restore  native biodiversity on farm level, which means that they  must not concentrate on monocultures.  • the expansion and development of new bioenergy crops,  plantations and/or tree plantings, must not introduce any  invasive species. Where there is doubt, the precautionary  principle must be applied.  environment  • the production of bioenergy from crops or residues must  maintain ecosystem services: water filtration, water quality  and quantity, nutrient recycling, soil organic carbon, overall  soil fertility and pollination.  • ecological farming practices must be applied that do not  pollute the biosphere through the accumulation of  agrochemicals, such as synthetic fertilizers, pesticides and  herbicides, in the soil, water or air. the use of  agrochemicals must be minimised and ultimately phased  out, which means that their use must be limited to when  there is no biological or organic alternative and to only the  most-efficient and non-polluting methods.18  social justice  • bioenergy production must not cause direct or indirect  destruction of, or transfer of land away from existing  peasant, indigenous, and/or nomadic  agricultural/agropastoral/pastoral systems.  • local food security, livelihoods, stakeholder rights and land  rights by local communities who live off the land must be  respected and strengthened, in line with the tenure guidelines  of the un committee on World food security (cfs).19  • indigenous peoples and local communities must have the right  to free and prior informed consent for the use of their land.  • labour rights must be respected according to the  international labour organization (ilo) standards.20  verification and transparency  • above criteria must be verified by an accredited and  transparent third party to prove that these criteria are met.  • information about the volume, specific feedstock and  feedstock origin of the bioenergy that each individual energy  company brings to the market must be publicly available.  9.3.1 policy recommendations  bioenergy can only be ecologically sound if coming from  sustainable and responsible sources and land uses. large  scale bioenergy production currently leads to uncontrollable  negative impacts because most land is not managed in a  sustainable way. this is why Greenpeace foresees a relatively  small role for bioenergy in the transition towards 100%  renewable energy. the constraints in the sphere of  governance are too complex to realistically adopt and  promote a large role for bioenergy in a socially and ecological  sustainable way. Greenpeace advises governments and  companies to be very cautious with policies related to  bioenergy, to apply all the principles and criteria listed in this  document and to make sure that acquisition of bioenergy  feedstock does not lead to damage to ecosystems, avoids  competition with soil fertility maintenance, food production  and the production of materials that store carbon. the  precautionary principle should guide the development and  implementation of bioenergy policies. the enforcement of a  robust institutional framework must prevent negative social  and environmental impacts. Governments must prioritize  sustainable land use policies, from ecological farming to  effective forest protection.  9.3.2 bioenergy and climate  the international accounting rules for greenhouse gas  emissions, as agreed upon within the united nations  framework convention on climate change (unfccc)  contain a major flaw regarding accounting for the greenhouse  gas emissions of bioenergy. Greenhouse gas emissions due  to land use, land use change and forestry (lulucf)  should be reported in the national greenhouse gas inventories  of annex 1 parties under the kyoto protocol. subsequently,  smokestack greenhouse gas emissions from biomass  combustion are set to zero, to avoid double counting.  however, in practise a lot of biomass that is burned in annex  1 countries comes from non-annex 1 countries and not all  annex 1 countries report lulucf emissions. furthermore,  while reporting land use and land use changes emissions is  mandatory for annex 1 countries, reporting forestry  emissions is only optional. on top of that, due to indirect  land use change (iluc), land use change is taking place in  non-annex 1 countries, as a result of bioenergy policies in  annex 1 countries. despite this, all bioenergy is accounted  for as climate neutral leading to an enormous carbon  accounting error. therefore, carbon accounting schemes  should stop assuming ‘carbon neutrality’ of bioenergy and  account for the net direct and indirect greenhouse gas  performance of bioenergy as outlined in the sustainability  criteria for bioenergy presented in this document.  224    bioenergy and sustainable land use  • agriculture has to be based on sustainable land use  management practices. a shift is needed from industrial  agriculture towards ecological farming based on closed  nutrient and water cycles. agricultural residues can only be  used for bioenergy in limited amounts. policies that  promote bioenergy made from agricultural residues should  not enhance unsustainable industrial agriculture.  • in countries that produce forest biomass, governments  should impose strict biomass sourcing policies that would  stop companies from cutting down standing trees for  energy production.  • livestock production uses 75% of agricultural land,  including both the land used to grow crops for animal feed  and pasture and grazing lands. Whether there will be space  for growing dedicated energy crops on agricultural land in  a responsible way in the future depends, amongst many  other factors, on the development of the diet of populations  around the world. consuming less animal protein reduces  significantly the surface of agricultural land needed for food  production. policies are therefore needed that  disincentivise animal protein consumption.  bioenergy and the energy transition  • access to clean renewable energy must be delivered for all.  apart from being inefficient and time consuming, most  traditional use of biomass in developing countries leads to  respiratory problems for its users and degradation of  forests and woodland resources, as well as soil erosion and  degradation. clean energy access must therefore be  prioritized for communities that still depend on traditional  biomass for cooking and heating. this is a ‘low-hanging  fruit’ that could combine a strong increase in welfare with  environmental protection and nature conservation.  • according to the polluter-pays-principle, subsidies for  bioenergy production must not make fundamentally  unsustainable industries more competitive. examples are  co-firing of biomass with coal in coal-fired power plants or  digestion of animal manure produced by intensive livestock  operations for meat and dairy production. the latter must  be required to mitigate methane emissions, but this should  not be subsidized.  • in biomass importing countries, governments should not  rely on bioenergy for meeting renewable energy targets.  the share of bioenergy must be capped.  • in biomass-importing countries, governments should not  rely on bioenergy for meeting renewable energy targets.  the share of bioenergy must be capped.  • the transition to 100% renewable energy entails a radical  system change, and bioenergy policies should not block  nor delay this change. replacing gasoline and diesel with  biofuels within the infrastructure of the oil industry and  within inefficient internal combustion engines does not  trigger a system change, nor does replacing coal with wood  in coal power plants.  • sustainable bioenergy, which is an inherently a limited  available energy source, should be part of a long term  strategy that leads to 100% renewable energy. sustainable  bioenergy should not be utilized for large-scale base load  electricity production, but for dispatching in the electricity  sector, heat production and as biofuel in aviation, shipping  and heavy road transport. maximising energy savings is  fundamental. Greenpeace’s energy [r]evolution provides a  pathway towards reaching these objectives.  • biofuel blending targets in the transport sector should be  replaced by energy savings and renewable energy targets,  with a focus on a shift to electric transport and truly  sustainable biofuels produced according to the principles  and criteria presented in this paper.    e n e r gy t e c h n o lo g i e s  image located well north of the arctic circle, uummannaq island is home to one of the most northerly towns in greenland. the sun never drops below the horizon for nearly  three months in summer, and winter brings months of darkness. sea ice still surrounded the island, but breaks in the ice—called leads—expose seawater beneath it. usually, sea ice  around uummannaq breaks up and drifts away by the end of may. home to about 1,200 people, the town of uummannaq lies on the southern tip of the island.  fossil fuel technologies nuclear technologies renewable energy  technologies  renewable heating and  cooling technologies  technologies which  convert solar and  wind into energy  are likely to gain  the largest  market shares”  “    this chapter describes the range of technologies available  now and in the future to satisfy the world’s energy demand.  the energy revolution scenario is focused on the potential  for energy savings and renewable sources, primarily in the  electricity and heat generating sectors.  10.1 fossil fuel technologies  the most commonly used fossil fuels for power generation  around the world are coal and gas. oil is still used where  other fuels are not readily available, for example islands or  remote sites, or where there is an indigenous resource.  together, coal and gas currently account for 63% of global  electricity supply (iea 2015).1  10.1.1 coal combustion technologies  in a conventional coal-fired power station, pulverised or  powdered coal is blown into a combustion chamber where it  is burned at high temperature. the resulting heat is used to  convert water flowing through pipes lining the boiler into  steam. this drives a steam turbine and generates electricity.  over 90% of global coal-fired capacity uses this system.  pulverized coal is still the most widely used fuel source and  coal power plants, but supercritical conditions have become  more common in modern coal plants in order to increase  efficiency. steam-drum boilers are still the norm, however,  and they limit total efficiency to roughly 40 percent of the  fuel’s lower heating value (lhv). at the beginning of the  century, state-of-the-art supercritical coal plants, in contrast,  reached thermal efficiencies up to 47 percent of lhv (ieacoal  online).2  coal power stations can vary in capacity from one block of  few hundred megawatts up to ten or more blocks with a total  capacity of several thousand megawatts.a number of  technologies have been introduced to improve the  environmental performance of conventional coal combustion.  these include coal cleaning (to reduce the ash content) and  various ‘bolt-on’ or ‘end-of-pipe’ technologies to reduce  emissions of particulates, sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide,  the main pollutants resulting from coal firing apart from  carbon dioxide. flue gas desulphurisation (fGd), for example,  most commonly involves ‘scrubbing’ the flue gases using  alkaline sorbent slurry, which is predominantly lime or  limestone based.  more fundamental changes have been made to the way coal  is burned both to improve its efficiency and further reduce  emissions of pollutants (Wca 2015).3 these include:  • integrated Gasification combined cycle: coal is not burned  directly but reacted with oxygen and steam to form a  synthetic gas composed mainly of hydrogen and carbon  monoxide. this is cleaned and then burned in a gas turbine  to generate electricity and produce steam to drive a steam  turbine. iGcc improves the efficiency of coal combustion  from 38-40% up to 50%.  • supercritical and ultra supercritical: these power plants  operate at higher temperatures than conventional  combustion, again increasing efficiency towards 50%.  • fluidised bed combustion (fbc): coal is burned in a reactor  comprised of a bed through which gas is fed to keep the  fuel in a turbulent state. this improves combustion, heat  transfer and the recovery of waste products. by elevating  pressures within a bed, a high-pressure gas stream can be  used to drive a gas turbine, generating electricity. emissions  of both sulphur dioxide and nitrogen oxide can be reduced  substantially (Wca 2015).  • pressurised pulverised coal combustion: mainly being  developed in Germany, this is based on the combustion of  a finely ground cloud of coal particles creating highpressure,  high-temperature steam for power generation.  the hot flue gases are used to generate electricity in a  similar way to the combined cycle system.  other potential future technologies involve the increased use  of coal gasification. underground coal Gasification, for  example, involves converting deep underground unworked  coal into a combustible gas which can be used for industrial  heating, power generation or the manufacture of hydrogen,  synthetic natural gas or other chemicals. the gas can be  processed to remove co2 before it is passed on to end users.  demonstration projects are underway in australia, europe,  china and japan.  10.1.2 gas combustion technologies  natural gas can be used for electricity generation through the  use of either gas or steam turbines. for the equivalent  amount of heat, gas produces about 45% (iea etp 2014)4  less carbon dioxide during its combustion than coal.  Gas turbine plants use the heat from gases to directly  operate the turbine. natural gas fuelled turbines can start  rapidly and are therefore often used to supply energy during  periods of peak demand, although at higher cost than base  load generation power plants.    particularly high electric efficiencies can be achieved by  combining gas turbines with a steam turbine in combined  cycle mode. in a combined cycle gas turbine (ccGt) plant, a  gas turbine generator produces electricity and the exhaust  gases from the turbine are then used to make steam to  generate additional electricity. the efficiency of modern ccGt  power stations can be up to 60 (iea etp 2014). most new gas  power plants built since the 1990s have been of this type.  historically, a major driver of technology development for gasfired  generation has been the quest for increased efficiency.  however, the effort to raise power plant efficiency is not the  only technical objective; other criteria, such as part-load  efficiency, ramp rate, turndown ratio and start-up times, are  important aspects for future flexible power generation systems  as well (iea-etp 2014). during the transition period to 100%  renewable flexible and quick starting gas turbines play an  important role to integrate high shares of wind and solar.  in case of low gas prices, ccGt power stations are the  cheapest option for electricity generation in many countries.  capital costs have been substantially lower than for coal and  nuclear plants and construction time shorter.  10.2 carbon reduction technologies and  carbon capture and storage (ccs)  Whenever a fossil fuel is burned, carbon dioxide (co2) is  produced. depending on the type of power plant, a large  quantity of the gas will dissipate into the atmosphere and  contribute to climate change. a hard coal power plant  discharges 730 grams of carbon dioxide per kilowatt-hour if  it is a (rare) ultra-supercritical coal plant, compared to 810g  co2 /kWh (iea-etp 2014) in an average modern coal plant. a  modern gas power plant in comparison emits around about  350g co2 /kWh. one method, currently under development,  to mitigate the co2 impact of fossil fuel combustion is called  carbon capture and storage (ccs). it involves capturing co2  from power plant smokestacks, compressing the captured  gas for transport via pipeline or ship and pumping it into  underground geological formations for permanent storage.  While frequently touted as the solution to the carbon problem  inherent in fossil fuel combustion, ccs for coal-fired power  stations is unlikely to be ready for at least another decade.  despite the ‘proof of concept’ experiments currently in  progress, the technology remains unproven as a fully  integrated process in relation to all of its operational  components. suitable and effective capture technology has  not been developed and is unlikely to be commercially  available any time soon; effective and safe long-term storage  on the scale necessary has not been demonstrated; and  serious concerns attach to the safety aspects of transport  and injection of co2 into designated formations, while long  term retention cannot reliably be assured.  deploying the technology in coal power plants is likely to  double construction costs, increase fuel consumption by 10-  40%, consume more water, generate more pollutants and  ultimately require the public sector to ensure that the co2  stays where it has been buried. in a similar way to the  disposal of nuclear waste, ccs envisages creating a scheme  whereby future generations monitor in perpetuity the climate  pollution produced by their predecessors.  in october 2014, saskpower’s boundary dam unit 3 in  canada became the world’s first commercial electricity  generating unit with full co2 capture. around 1 million tonnes  of co2 (mtco2) per year – 90% of co2 emissions from the unit  – will be captured and stored underground through enhanced  oil recovery (eor) (iea tcep 2015).5 to put this in a global  context: 1 million tonnes of co2 storage is equal the global  energy related co2 emissions of about 17 minutes (teske  ccs-1).6 in 2014, energy-related co2 emission added up to  32.3 billion tonnes of co2.  10.2.1 carbon dioxide storage  in order to benefit the climate, captured co2 has to be stored  somewhere permanently. current thinking is that it can be  pumped under the earth’s surface at a depth of over 3,000  feet into geological formations, such as saline aquifers.  however, the volume of co2 that would need to be captured  and stored is enormous - a single coal-fired power plant can  produce 7 million tonnes of co2 annually.  it is estimated that a single ‘stabilisation wedge’ of ccs  (enough to reduce carbon emissions by 1 billion metric  tonnes per year by 2050) would require a flow of co2 into the  ground equal to the current flow of coal out of the ground -  and in addition to the associated infrastructure to compress,  transport and pump it underground. it is still not clear that it  will be technically feasible to capture and bury this much  carbon, both in terms of the number of storage sites and  whether they will be located close enough to power plants.  even if it is feasible to bury hundreds of thousands of  megatonnes of co2, there is no way to guarantee that storage  locations will be appropriately designed and managed over  the timescales required. the world has limited experience of  storing co2 underground; the longest running storage project  at sleipner in the norwegian north sea began operation only  in 1996. this is particularly concerning because as long as  co2 is present in geological sites, there is a risk of leakage.  although leakages are unlikely to occur in well-characterised,  managed and monitored sites, permanent storage stability  cannot be guaranteed since tectonic activity and natural  leakage over long timeframes are impossible to predict.    sudden leakage of co2 can be fatal. carbon dioxide is not  itself poisonous but is contained (approx. 0.04 %) in the air  we breathe. but as concentrations increase, it displaces the  vital oxygen in the air; air with concentrations of 7 to 8% co2  by volume causes death by suffocation after 30 to 60 minutes  (Gpi-fh 2008).7  there are also health hazards when large amounts of co2 are  explosively released. although the gas normally disperses  quickly after leaking, it can accumulate in depressions in the  landscape or closed buildings, since carbon dioxide is  heavier than air. it is equally dangerous when it escapes more  slowly and without being noticed in residential areas, for  example in cellars below houses.  the dangers from such leaks are known from natural volcanic  co2 degassing. Gas escaping at the lake nyos crater lake  in cameroon, africa, in 1986 killed over 1,700 people. at  least ten people have died in the lazio region of italy in the  last 20 years as a result of co2 being released.  10.2.2 carbon storage and climate change targets  can carbon storage contribute to climate change reduction  targets? in order to avoid dangerous climate change, global  greenhouse gas emissions need to peak by between 2015  and 2020 and fall dramatically thereafter. however, power  plants capable of capturing and storing co2 are still being  developed and won’t become a reality in a truly commercial  scale for at least another decade, if ever. this means that even  if ccs works, the technology would not make any substantial  contribution towards protecting the climate before 2020.  power plant co2 storage will also not be of any great help in  attaining the goal of at least an 80% greenhouse gas  reduction by 2050 in oecd countries. even if ccs were to be  available in 2020, most of the world’s new power plants will  have just finished being modernised. all that could then be  done would be for existing power plants to be retrofitted and  co2 captured from the waste gas flow. retrofitting power  plants would be an extremely expensive exercise. ‘capture  ready’ power plants are equally unlikely to increase the  likelihood of retrofitting existing fleets with capture technology.  the conclusion reached in the energy revolution scenario is  that renewable energy sources are already available, in many  cases cheaper, and lack the negative environmental impacts  associated with fossil fuel exploitation, transport and  processing. it is renewable energy together with energy  efficiency and energy conservation – and not carbon capture  and storage – that has to increase worldwide so that the  primary cause of climate change – the burning of fossil fuels  like coal, oil and gas – is stopped.  greenpeace opposes any ccs efforts which leads to:  • public financial support to ccs at the expense of funding  renewable energy development and investment in energy  efficiency.  • stagnation of renewable energy, energy efficiency and  energy conservation improvements.  • inclusion of ccs in the kyoto protocol’s clean  development mechanism (cdm) as it would divert funds  away from the stated intention of the mechanism, and  cannot be considered clean development under any  coherent definition of this term.  • promotion of this possible future technology as the only  major solution to climate change, thereby leading to new  fossil fuel developments – especially lignite and black coalfired  power plants, and an increase in emissions in the  short to medium term.  10.3 nuclear technologies  Generating electricity from nuclear power involves  transferring the heat produced by a controlled nuclear fission  reaction into a conventional steam turbine generator. the  nuclear reaction takes place inside a core and surrounded by  a containment vessel of varying design and structure. heat is  removed from the core by a coolant (gas or water) and the  reaction controlled by a moderating element or “moderator”.  across the world over the last two decades there has been a  general slowdown in building new nuclear power stations  because of concern about a possible nuclear accident  (following the events at three mile island, chernobyl, monju  and fukushima) and increased scrutiny of economics and  environmental factors, such as waste management and  radioactive discharges.  nuclear reactor designs: evolution and safety issues  by mid-2015 there were 391 nuclear power reactors  operating in 31 countries around the world.  nuclear plants are commonly divided into four generations.  there are no clear definitions of design categories  (scheider/froggatt 2015):8  generation i: prototype commercial reactors developed in the  1950s and 1960s as modified or enlarged military reactors,  originally either for submarine propulsion or plutonium  production.  generation ii: mainstream reactor designs in commercial  operation worldwide.    generation iii: new generation reactors now being built.  generation iii+ and iv: reactors developed or significantly  modified after the chernobyl disaster.  Generation iii+ reactors include the so-called advanced  reactors, three of which are already in operation in japan,  with more under construction or planned. about 20 different  designs are reported to be under development,9 most of them  ‘evolutionary’ designs developed from Generation ii reactor  types with some modifications, but without introducing  drastic changes. some of them represent more innovative  approaches.  according to the World nuclear association, reactors of  Generation iii are characterised by the following:  • a standardised design for each type to expedite licensing,  reduce capital cost and construction time  • a simpler and more rugged design, making them easier to  operate and less vulnerable to operational upsets  • higher availability and longer operating life, typically 60 years  • reduced possibility of core melt accidents  • minimal effect on the environment  • higher burn-up to reduce fuel use and the amount of waste  • burnable absorbers (‘poisons’) to extend fuel life  to what extent these goals address issues of higher safety  standards, as opposed to improved economics, remains  unclear.  of the new reactor types, the european pressurised Water  reactor (epr) has been developed from the most recent  Generation ii designs to start operation in france and finland  (schneider/froggatt 2015). its stated goals are to improve  safety levels - in particular to reduce the probability of a  severe accident by a factor of ten, achieve mitigation from  severe accidents by restricting their consequences to the  plant itself, and reduce costs. compared to its predecessors,  however, the epr displays several modifications which  constitute a reduction of safety margins, including:  • the volume of the reactor building has been reduced by  simplifying the layout of the emergency core cooling  system, and by using the results of new calculations which  predict less hydrogen development during an accident.  • the thermal output of the plant has been increased by 15%  relative to existing french reactors by increasing core outlet  temperature, letting the main coolant pumps run at higher  capacity and modifying the steam generators.  • the epr has fewer redundant pathways in its safety  systems than a German Generation ii reactor.  several other modifications are hailed as substantial safety  improvements, including a ‘core catcher’ system to control a  meltdown accident. nonetheless, in spite of the changes  being envisaged, there is no guarantee that the safety level of  the epr actually represents a significant improvement. in  particular, reduction of the expected core melt probability by  a factor of ten is not proven. furthermore, there are serious  doubts as to whether the mitigation and control of a core melt  accident with the core catcher concept will actually work.  the World nuclear association (Wna) claims that: “newer  advanced reactors [Generation iii+] now being built have  simpler designs which reduce capital cost. they are more fuel  efficient and are inherently safer. in more detail, it lists some  of the design characteristics of which the most relevant to  this analysis are (schneider/froggatt 2015):  • a standardized design for each type to expedite licensing,  reduce capital cost and reduce construction time,  • a simpler and more rugged design, making them easier to  operate and less vulnerable to operational upsets,  • further reduced possibility of core melt accidents,  • substantial grace period, so that following shutdown the  plant requires no active intervention for (typically) 72 hours,  • resistance to serious damage that would release  radioactivity after an aircraft impact.  price rises occur throughout the period from project  announcement to operation. for example, in 2003, the  french industry ministry estimated that construction costs for  an epr would be just over €1 billion (us$1.2 billion) per  reactor. the price tag had tripled by the time the contract was  signed for the flamanville plant in 2007, and by 2012, the  estimated cost had reached €8.5 billion (us$10.6 billion)  (schneider/froggatt 2015).  finally, Generation iv reactors are currently being developed  with the aim of commercialisation in 20-30 years.  10.4 renewable power technologies and  heating technologies  renewable energy covers a range of natural sources which are  constantly renewed and therefore, unlike fossil fuels and  uranium, will never be exhausted. most of them derive from the  effect of the sun and moon on the earth’s weather patterns.  they also produce none of the harmful emissions and pollution  associated with ‘conventional’ fuels. although hydroelectric  power has been used on an industrial scale since the middle of  the last century, the serious exploitation of other renewable  sources has a more recent history.    box 10.1 | definition of renewable energy  “renewable energy is any form of energy from solar,  geophysical or biological sources that is replenished by  natural processes at a rate that equals or exceeds its rate of  use. re is obtained from the continuing or repetitive flows of  energy occurring in the natural environment and includes  resources such as biomass, solar energy, geothermal heat,  hydropower, tide and waves and ocean thermal energy, and  wind energy. however, it is possible to utilize biomass at a  greater rate than it can grow, or to draw heat from a  geothermal field at a faster rate than heat flows can replenish  it. on the other hand, the rate of utilization of direct solar  energy has no bearing on the rate at which it reaches the  earth. fossil fuels (coal, oil, natural gas) do not fall under this  definition, as they are not replenished within a time frame that  is short relative to their rate of utilization.”  IPCC definition for renewable energy (Source IPCC,  Special Report Renewable Energy /SRREN Renewables for  Power Generation.    10.4.1 solar power (photovoltaics)  there is more than enough solar radiation available all over  the world to satisfy a vastly increased demand for solar  power systems. the sunlight which reaches the earth’s  surface is enough to provide 7,900 times as much energy as  we can currently use. on a global average, each square  metre of land is exposed to enough sunlight to produce 1,700  kWh of power every year. the average irradiation in europe is  about 1,000 kWh per square metre and 1,800 kWh in the  middle east.  photovoltaic (pv) technology involves the generation of  electricity from light. photovoltaic systems contain cells that  convert sunlight into electricity. inside each cell there are  layers of a semi-conducting material. light falling on the cell  creates an electric field across the layers, causing electricity  to flow. the intensity of the light determines the amount of  electrical power each cell generates. a photovoltaic system  does not need bright sunlight in order to operate. it can also  generate some electricity on cloudy and rainy days from  diffuse sunlight.  the most important parts of a pv system are the cells which  form the basic building blocks, the modules which bring  together large numbers of cells into a unit, and, in some  situations, the inverters used to convert the electricity  generated into a form suitable for everyday use. When a pv  installation is described as having a capacity of 3 kWp (peak),  this refers to the output of the system under standard testing  conditions, allowing comparison between different modules.  in central europe a 3 kWp rated solar electricity system, with  a surface area of approximately 27 square metres, would  produce enough power to meet the electricity demand of an  energy conscious household.  there are several different pv technologies and types of  installed system.  pv systems can provide clean power for small or large  applications. they are already installed and generating  energy around the world on individual homes, housing  developments, offices and public buildings.  today, fully functioning solar pv installations operate in both  built environments and remote areas where it is difficult to  connect to the grid or where there is no energy infrastructure.  pv installations that operate in isolated locations are known  as stand-alone systems. in built areas, pv systems can be  mounted on top of roofs (known as building adapted pv  systems – or bapv) or can be integrated into the roof or  building facade (known as building integrated pv systems –  or bipv).  modern pv systems are not restricted to square and flat  panel arrays. they can be curved, flexible and shaped to the  building’s design. innovative architects and engineers are  constantly finding new ways to integrate pv into their  designs, creating buildings that are dynamic, beautiful and  provide free, clean energy throughout their life.    10.4.2 pv cells and modules  crystalline silicon technology: crystalline silicon cells are made  from thin slices cut from a single crystal of silicon (mono  crystalline) or from a block of silicon crystals (polycrystalline or  multi crystalline). this technology is the most common,  representing about 80% of the market today. in addition, it also  exists in the form of ribbon sheets (hoffmann /teske 2012).10  thin film technology: thin film modules are constructed by  depositing extremely thin layers of photosensitive materials  onto a substrate such as glass, stainless steel or flexible  plastic. the latter opens up a range of applications,  especially for building integration (roof tiles) and endconsumer  purposes. four types of thin film modules are  commercially available at the moment: amorphous silicon,  cadmium telluride, copper indium/Gallium  diselenide/disulphide and multi-junction cells.  other emerging cell technologies (at the development or early  commercial stage): these include concentrated photovoltaic,  consisting of cells built into concentrating collectors that use  a lens to focus the concentrated sunlight onto the cells, and  organic solar cells, whereby the active material consists at  least partially of organic dye, small, volatile organic molecules  or polymer.  cells are connected to form larger units called modules. thin  sheets of eva (ethyl vinyl acetate) or pvb (polyvinyl butyral)  are used to bind cells together and provide weather  protection. the modules are normally enclosed between a  transparent cover (usually glass) and a weatherproof backing  sheet (typically made from a thin polymer). modules can be  framed for extra mechanical strength and durability. thin film  modules are usually encapsulated between two sheets of  glass, so a frame is not needed (epia-2011).11  10.4.3 pv systems  the key parts of a solar energy generation system are:  • photovoltaic modules to collect sunlight  • an inverter to transform direct current (dc) to alternate  current (ac)  • a set of batteries for stand-alone pv systems  • support structures to orient the pv modules toward the sun.  the system components, excluding the pv modules, are  referred to as the balance of system (bos) components.  industrial and utility-scale power plants  large industrial pv systems can produce enormous  quantities of electricity at a single location. such power  plants have outputs ranging from hundreds of kilowatts (kW)  to hundreds of megawatts (mW).  the solar panels for industrial systems are usually mounted  on frames on the ground. however, they can also be installed  on large industrial buildings, such as warehouses, airport  terminals and railways stations. the system can make double  use of an urban space and put electricity into the grid where  energy-intensive consumers are located.  residential and commercial systems  grid connected  Grid connected arrays are the most popular type of solar pv  systems for homes and businesses in the developed world.  connected to the local grid, they allow any excess power  produced to be sold to the utility. When solar energy is not  available, electricity can be drawn from the grid. an inverter is  used to convert the dc power produced by the system to ac  power for running normal electrical equipment. this type of  pv system is referred to as being ‘on-grid.’ a ‘Grid support’  system can be connected to the local grid along with a backup  battery. any excess solar electricity produced after the  battery has been charged is then sold to the grid. this system  is ideal for use in areas of unreliable power supply.  stand-alone, off-grid systems  off-grid pv systems have no connection to a grid. an off-grid  system usually has batteries, so power can still be used at  night or after several days of low sun. an inverter is needed  to convert the dc power generated into ac power for use in  appliances. typical off-grid applications include:  • off-grid systems for rural electrification Grid typical off-grid  installations bring electricity to remote areas or villages in  developing countries. they can be small home systems,  which cover a household’s basic electricity needs, or larger  solar mini-grids, which provide enough power for several  homes, a community or small business use.  source ?    • off-grid industrial applications off-grid industrial systems  are used in remote areas to power repeater stations for  mobile telephones (enabling communications), traffic  signals, marine navigational aids, remote lighting, highway  signs and water treatment plants. both full pv and hybrid  systems are used. hybrid systems are powered by the sun  when it is available and by other fuel sources during the  night and extended cloudy periods. off-grid industrial  systems provide a cost-effective way to bring power to  areas very far from existing grids. the high cost of installing  cabling makes off-grid solar power an economical choice.  • consumer goods pv cells are now found in many everyday  electrical appliances such as watches, calculators, toys,  and battery chargers (as for instance embedded in clothes  and bags). services such as water sprinklers, road signs,  lighting and telephone boxes also often rely on individual  pv systems.  • hybrid systems a solar power system can be combined  with another source of power – such as a biomass  generator, a wind turbine or diesel generator - to ensure a  consistent supply of electricity. a hybrid system can be  grid-connected, standalone or grid-supported.  10.4.4 concentrating solar power (csp)  the majority of the world’s electricity today—whether generated  by coal, gas, nuclear, oil or biomass—comes from creating a  hot fluid. concentrating solar power (csp) technologies  produce electricity by concentrating direct-beam solar  irradiance to heat a liquid, solid or gas that is then used in a  downstream process for electricity generation. csp simply  provides an alternative heat source. csp uses direct sunlight,  called ‘beam radiation’ or direct normal irradiation (dni) –  sunlight not dispersed by clouds, fumes or dust in the  atmosphere. this sunlight reaches the earth’s surface in parallel  beams for concentration. suitable sites need to get a lot of this  direct sun - at least 2,000 kilowatt-hours (kWh) per square  metre annually and the best sites receive more than 2,800  kWh/m2/year. in these regions, one square kilometre of land is  enough to generate as much as 100-130 gigawatt hours (GWh)  of solar electricity per year using solar thermal technology.  thus, csp plants, also called solar thermal power plants,  produce electricity in much the same way as conventional  power stations. they obtain their energy input by  concentrating solar radiation and converting it to high  temperature steam or gas to drive a turbine or motor engine.  large mirrors concentrate sunlight into a single line or point.  234    the heat created there is used to generate steam. this hot, highly  pressurised steam is used to power turbines which generate  electricity. in sun-drenched regions, csp plants can guarantee a  large proportion of electricity production. this technology builds  on much of the current know-how on power generation in the  world today. it will benefit from on-going advances in solar  concentrator technology and as improvements continue to be  made in steam and gas turbine cycles.  some of the advantages of csp:  • it can integrate thermal storage for peaking loads (less than  one hour) and intermediate loads (three to six hours);  • it can provide industrial process heat  • it can be used of desalination to produce drinking water  • it has modular and scalable components;  types of csp systems  all systems require four main elements: a concentrator, a  receiver, some form of transfer medium or storage, and  power conversion. many different types of system are  possible, including combinations with other renewable and  non-renewable technologies, but there are four main groups  of solar thermal technologies. this whole subchapter is  based on a technical paper of the european solar thermal  electricity association (estela 2015):12  parabolic trough  parabolic trough plants use rows of parabolic trough  collectors, each of which reflect the solar radiation into an  absorber tube. the troughs track the sun around one axis,  with the axis typically being oriented north-south. synthetic oil  circulates through the tubes, heating up to approximately  400°c. the hot oil from numerous rows of troughs is passed  through a heat exchanger to generate steam for a  conventional steam turbine generator to generate electricity.  some of the plants under construction have been designed to  produce power not only during sunny hours but also to store  energy, allowing the plant to produce an additional 7.5 hours  of nominal power after sunset, which dramatically improves  their integration into the grid. molten salts are normally used  as storage fluid in a hot-and-cold two-tank concept. plants in  operation in europe: andasol 1 and 2 (50 mW +7.5 hour  storage each); puertollano (50 mW); alvarado (50 mW) and  extresol 1 (50 mW + 7.5 hour storage). land requirements are  of the order of 2 km2 for a 100-mWe plant, depending on the  collector technology and assuming no storage is provided.  linear fresnel systems  collectors resemble parabolic troughs, with a similar power  generation technology, using long lines of flat or nearly flat  fresnel reflectors to form a field of horizontally mounted flat  mirror strips, collectively or individually tracking the sun.  these are cheaper to install than trough systems but not as  efficient. there is one plant currently in operation in europe:  puerto errado (2 mW).  central receiver or solar tower  central receivers (or “power towers”) are point-focus  collectors that are able to generate much higher  temperatures than troughs and linear fresnel reflectors. this  technology uses a circular array of mirrors (heliostats) where  each mirror tracks the sun, reflecting the light onto a fixed  receiver on top of a tower. temperatures of more than  1,000°c can be reached. a heat-transfer medium absorbs  the highly concentrated radiation reflected by the heliostats  and converts it into thermal energy to be used for the  subsequent generation of superheated steam for turbine  operation. to date, the heat transfer media demonstrated  include water/steam, molten salts, liquid sodium and air. if  pressurised gas or air is used at very high temperatures of  about 1,000°c or more as the heat transfer medium, it can  even be used to directly replace natural gas in a gas turbine,  thus making use of the excellent efficiency (60%+) of modern  gas and steam combined cycles.  after an intermediate scaling up to 30 mW capacity, solar  tower developers now feel confident that grid-connected  tower power plants can be built up to a capacity of 200 mWe  solar-only units. use of heat storage will increase their  flexibility. although solar tower plants are considered to be  further from commercialisation than parabolic trough  systems, they have good longer-term prospects for high  conversion efficiencies. projects are being developed in  spain, south africa and australia.  parabolic dish  a dish-shaped reflector is used to concentrate sunlight on to  a receiver located at its focal point. the receiver moves with  the dish. the concentrated beam radiation is absorbed into  the receiver to heat a fluid or gas to approximately 750°c.  this is then used to generate electricity in a small piston,  stirling engine or micro turbine attached to the receiver.  dishes have been used to power stirling engines up to  900°c, and also for steam generation. the largest solar  dishes have a 485-m2 aperture and are in research facilities or  demonstration plants. currently the capacity of each stirling  engine is small — in the order of 10 to 25 kWelectric. there  is now significant operational experience with dish/stirling  engine systems and the technology has been under  development for many years, with advances in dish  structures, high-temperature receivers, use of hydrogen as  the circulating working fluid, as well as some experiments  with liquid metals and improvements in stirling engines — all  bringing the technology closer to commercial deployment.  although the individual unit size may only be of the order of  tens of kWe, power stations having a large capacity of up to  800 mWe have been proposed by aggregating many  modules. because each dish represents a stand-alone  electricity generator, from the perspective of distributed  generation there is great flexibility in the capacity and rate at  which units are installed. however, the dish technology is less  likely to integrate thermal storage. the potential of parabolic  dishes lies primarily for decentralised power supply and  remote, stand-alone power systems. projects are currently  planned in the united states, australia and europe.  csp system components  in addition to the different types of solar reflector systems, a  csp power plant has power generation equipment like what  is used in gas power plants; increasingly, a thermal storage  unit is also installed. the output of a csp power plant is  power and different levels of heat which can be used for  industrial process heat, for the desalination of water, etc.  10.4.5 csp - thermal storage  thermal energy storage integrated into a system is an important  attribute of csp. until recently, this has been primarily for  operational purposes, providing 30 minutes to 1 hour of fullload  storage. this eases the impact of thermal transients such  as clouds on the plant, assists start-up and shut-down, and  provides benefits to the grid. trough plants are now designed  for 6 to 7.5 hours of storage, which is enough to allow  operation well into the evening when peak demand can occur  and tariffs are high.  to provide solar electricity after sunset with csp, thermal  energy is stored in very large quantities. thermal energy storage  (tes) systems are an integral part of a csp power plant,  allowing eliminating short term variations of electricity  production: the thermal energy collected by the solar field is  stored for conversion to electricity later in the day. storage can  adapt the profile of power produced throughout the day to  demand and can increase the total power output of a plant with  given maximum turbine capacity by storing excess energy of a  larger solar field before it is used in the turbine. eventually the  plant can be operated nearly at 100% capacity factor as a base  load plant in appropriate locations.  236      thermal storage has been used in 40% of spanish plants since  2010 and is almost included in every new plant today. a number  of 5 to 10 hours storage, depending on the dni is an average.  the iea reports that “when thermal storage is used to increase  the capacity factor, it can reduce the levelised cost of solar  thermal electricity (lcoe). thermal storage also has remarkable  “return” efficiency, especially when the storage medium is also  used as heat transfer fluid. it may then achieve 98% return  efficiency – i.e., energy losses are limited to about 2%.  there are 3 categories of storage media that can be used in  csp plant but their maturity degree is different (estela 2015):  • advanced sensible heat storage systems: such system are in  most of the state-of-the-art csp plants, with a “two-tank  molten salt storage” (two tanks with molten salts at  different temperature levels). the development of new  storage mediums with improved thermal stability, such as  molten salt mixtures will allow higher temperatures to be  attained. higher temperatures allow for increased energy  density within the tes and hence lower the specific  investment costs for the system. improvements to tes  systems would have the potential to reduce capex while  improving efficiency.  • cost-effective latent heat storage systems: latent heat  storage has not been implemented in commercial ste  plants yet, but several research project support the  introduction and use of phase changing materials in tes  technologies. the use of latent heat storage offers new  possibilities for dsG helping in achieving cost  competitiveness with sensible heat technologies.  • thermochemical storage systems: to date, there are no  known commercial systems for thermochemical tes in ste  plants. research into the application this technology  started 40 years ago. development projects assume  potentials in energy density up to 10 times higher than a  comparable sensible heat tes (estela 2015).    1. parabolic mirrors (concentratinG solar collector field).  heat transfer fluid is heated directly by the sun’s rays.  2. heat exchangers.  3. thermal storage tanks.  4. condenser. converts the steam back into Water and the  process beGins aGain.  5. steam turbine & generator. inside the steam expands and  spins the turbine, GeneratinG electricity that passes  throuGh a transformer before beinG feed into the Grid.  10.4.6 wind power  Wind energy has grown faster than all other electricity sources  in the last 20 years, and turbine technology has advanced  sufficiency that a single machine can have a capacity of 7  megawatt. in europe, wind farms are generally well integrated  into the environment and accepted by the public. smaller  models can produce electricity for areas that are not  connected to a central grid, through use of battery storage.  Wind speeds and patterns are good enough for this  technology on all continents, on both coastlines and inland.  the wind resource out at sea is particularly productive and is  now being harnessed by offshore wind parks with  foundations embedded in the ocean floor.  wind turbine design  modern wind technology is available for low and high wind  speeds, and in a variety of climates. a variety of onshore wind  turbine configurations have been investigated, including both  horizontal and vertical axis designs (see figure 4 ). the  horizontal axis design dominates, and most designs now  centre on the three-blade, upwind rotor; locating the turbine  blades upwind of the tower prevents the tower from blocking  wind flow onto the blades and producing extra aerodynamic  noise and loading (eWea 2008).13  the blades are attached to a hub and main shaft, which  transfers power to a generator, sometimes via a gearbox  (depending on design). the electricity output is channelled down  the tower to a transformer and eventually into the local grid. the  main shaft and main bearings, gearbox, generator and control  system are contained within a housing called the nacelle.  as turbine size has increased over time, turbine output is  controlled by pitching (i.e., rotating) the blades along their long  axis.14 reduced cost of power electronics allowed for variable  speed wind turbine operation, which helps maintain production  in variable and gusty winds, keeps large wind power plants  generating during electrical faults, and provides reactive power.  modern wind turbines typically operate at variable speeds  using full-span blade pitch control. over the past 30 years,  the average wind turbine size has grown significantly (figure  9), with most onshore wind turbines installed globally in 2014  having a rated capacity of 3.5 to 7,5 mW; the average size of  turbines installed in 2014 was at around 2.5 – 3.0 mW.  as of 2015, wind turbines used on land typically have 80 to 120-  m tall towers, with rotors between 80 to 125 m in diameter. the  average tower installed in 2014 in Germany for example was 93  m tall (statistica 2015).15 some commercial machines have  diameters and tower heights above 125 m, and even larger  models are being developed. modern turbines operate spin at  12 to 20 revolutions per minute (rpm), much slower than the  models from the 1980s models, which spun at 60 rpm. modern  rotors are slower, less visually disruptive and less noisy.  onshore wind turbines are typically grouped together into wind  power plants, with between 5- 300 mW generating capacity,  and are sometimes also called wind farms. turbines have been  getting larger to help reduce the cost of generation (reach  better quality wind), reduce investment per unit of capacity and  reduce operation and maintenance costs (eWea 2014).16  238    for turbines in land, there will be engineering and logistical  constraints to size because the components have to travel by road.  modern wind turbines have nearly reached their theoretical  maximum (0.59) of aerodynamic efficiency, measured by the  coefficient of performance (0.44 in the 1980s to about 0.50  by the mid-2000s).  offshore wind energy technology  by the end of 2014, the existing offshore market made up just  2.4% of the world’s land-based installed wind capacity;  however, the potential at sea is driving the latest  developments towards large turbine sizes. Wind technology  currently develops for two different markets: offshore and  sites of high wind resources; and onshore sites of moderate  resources which requires different technical concepts.  the first offshore wind power plant was built in 1991 in  denmark, consisting of eleven 450 kW wind turbines. in 2014  1,713 mW of new offshore capacity was added, bringing the  total to 8,759 megawatts (GWec 2015).17  by going offshore, wind energy can make use stronger winds  and provide clean energy to countries where there is less  technical potential for land-based wind energy development and  where it would conflict with other land uses. there is less ‘shear’  near hub height with offshore wind. Greater economies of scale  result from large turbines that can be transported by ship and  from larger power plants. offshore wind farms also reduce the  need for new, long-distance, land-based transmission  infrastructure that wind farms on land can require.18  there is considerable interest in offshore wind energy  technology in the eu and, increasingly, in other regions such  as china, japan and north america, despite the typically  higher costs relative to onshore wind energy, because of its  advantage to supply large coastal cities and/or industry.  offshore wind turbines built between 2009 and 2014 typically  have nameplate capacity ratings of 2 to 5 mW, and larger  turbines are under development. offshore wind farms are  installed in groups of 50 to 100 turbines with total capacities  in the low to medium hundred megawatt capacity, and often  installed in water between 10 and 20 m deep. distance to  shore has is mostly less than 20 km, but average distance has  increased over time.19 offshore wind is likely to be installed at  greater depths, and the larger turbines (5 to 10mW or larger)  as experience is gained and for greater economies of scale.  offshore wind turbine technology has been very similar to  onshore designs, with some structural modifications and with  special foundations.20 other design features include marine  navigational equipment and monitoring and infrastructure to  minimise expensive servicing. by 2015, the offshore wind  industry started moving into the commercialization phase;  further cost reductions are likely. the German offshore Wind  industry expects that, in stable market conditions, the costs  of offshore wind power can decrease by up to 39 % by 2023  (GoWef 2014).  the next step – floating offshore wind  in order to unlock the full potential of offshore wind, areas  with water depth greater than 50 meters must be opened for  this technique. large cities in asia and latin america are  often close to the sea, and offshore wind farms can  potentially supply mega-cities with electricity and/or the  production of syn-fuels in the future.  the concept of a floating wind turbine has existed since the  early 1970s, but the industry only started researching it in the  mid-1990s. in 2008, blue h technologies installed the first  test floating wind turbine off the italian coast. the turbine had  a rated capacity of 80 kW; after a year of testing and data  collection, it was decommissioned. a year later, the poseidon  37 project followed, a 37m-wide wave energy plant and  floating wind turbine foundation tested at donG’s offshore  wind farm at onsevig. in 2009, statoil installed the world’s  first large scale grid connected floating wind turbine, hywind,  in norway, with a 2.3 mW siemens turbine. the second large  scale floating system, Windfloat, developed by principle  power in partnership with edp and repsol, was installed off  the portuguese coast in 2011. equipped with a 2 mW vestas  wind turbine, the installation started producing energy in  2012 (eWea 7-2013).22  2011 was the best year on record for deep offshore  development with two floating substructures tested, seatwirl  and sWay, in addition to the grid connected Windfloat  project. by the end of 2013, offshore wind farms used three  main types of deep offshore foundations, adapted from the  offshore oil and gas industry (eWea 7-2013):  • spar buoy: a very large cylindrical buoy stabilizes the wind  turbine using ballast. the centre of gravity is much lower in  the water than the centre of buoyancy. Whereas the lower  parts of the structure are heavy, the upper parts are usually  empty elements near the surface, raising the centre of  buoyancy. the hywind concept consists of this slender,  ballast-stabilised cylinder structure.  • tension leg platform: a very buoyant structure is semi  submerged. tensioned mooring lines are attached to it and  anchored on the seabed to add buoyancy and stability.  • semi-submersible: combining the main principles of the two  previous designs, a semi submerged structure is added to  reach the necessary stability. Windfloat uses this technology.    10.4.7 biomass energy  biomass is a broad term used to describe material of recent  biological origin that can be used as a source of energy. it  includes wood, crops, algae and other plants as well as  agricultural and forest residues. biomass can be used for a  variety of end uses: heating, electricity generation or as fuel  for transportation. the term ‘bioenergy’ is used for biomass  energy systems that produce heat and/or electricity;  ‘biofuels’, for liquid fuels used in transport. biodiesel and  bioethanol manufactured from various crops have become  increasingly common as vehicle fuels, especially as the cost of  oil has risen.  biological power sources are renewable, easily stored, and, if  sustainably harvested, co2 neutral. the gas emitted during  their transfer into useful energy is balanced by the carbon  dioxide absorbed when they were growing plants.  bioenergy for power generation  electricity generating biomass power plants work just like  natural gas or coal power stations, except that the fuel must  be processed before it can be burned. these power plants  are generally not as large as coal power stations because  their fuel supply needs to grow as near as possible to the  plant. heat generation from biomass power plants can result  either from utilising a combined heat and power (chp)  system, piping the heat to nearby homes or industry, or  through dedicated heating systems. small heating systems  using specially produced pellets made from waste wood, for  example, can be used to heat single family homes instead of  natural gas or oil.  10.4.8 biomass technology  a number of processes can be used to convert energy from  biomass: thermochemical processes (direct combustion of  solids, liquids or a gas via pyrolysis or gasification) and  biological systems, (decomposition of solid biomass to liquid  or gaseous fuels by processes such as anaerobic digestion  and fermentation).  thermochemical processes  direct combustion  direct biomass combustion is the most common way of  converting biomass into energy for both heat and electricity,  accounting for over 90% of biomass generation. combustion  processes are well understood; in essence, when carbon and  hydrogen in the fuel react with excess oxygen to form co2 and  water and release heat. in rural areas, many forms of biomass  are burned for cooking. Wood and charcoal are also used as  a fuel in industry. a wide range of existing commercial  technologies are tailored to the characteristics of the biomass  and the scale of their applications (iea bio-2009).  the technologies types are fixed bed, fluidised bed or  entrained flow combustion. in fixed bed combustion, such as  a grate furnace, air first passes through a fixed bed for  drying, gasification and charcoal combustion. the  combustible gases produced are burned after the addition of  secondary air, usually in a zone separated from the fuel bed.  in fluidised bed combustion, the primary combustion air is  injected from the bottom of the furnace with such high  velocity that the material inside the furnace becomes a  seething mass of particles and bubbles. entrained flow  combustion is suitable for fuels available as small particles,  such as sawdust or fine shavings, which are pneumatically  injected into the furnace.  gasification  biomass fuels are increasingly being used with advanced  conversion technologies, such as gasification systems, which  are more efficient than conventional power generation.  biomass gasification occurs when a partial oxidation of  biomass happens upon heating, producing a combustible gas  mixture (called producer gas or fuel gas) rich in co and  hydrogen (h2) that has an energy content of 5 to 20 mj/nm3  (depending on the type of biomass and whether gasification  is conducted with air, oxygen or through indirect heating).  this energy content is roughly 10 to 45% of the heating value  of natural gas (ipcc srren 2011).2  figure 10.11 | biogas technology  fuel gas can then be upgraded to a higher-quality gas  mixture called biomass synthesis gas or syngas (faaij 2006).24  a gas turbine, boiler or steam turbine can be used to employ  unconverted gas for electricity co-production. coupled with  electricity generators, syngas can be used as a fuel in place  of diesel in suitably designed or adapted internal combustion  engines. most commonly available gasifiers use wood or  woody biomass, specially designed gasifiers can convert  non-woody biomass materials (yokoyama and matsumura  2008).25 compared to combustion, gasification is more  efficient, providing better controlled heating, higher  efficiencies in power production and the possibility for coproducing  chemicals and fuels (kirkels and verbong 2011).26  Gasification can also decrease emission levels compared to  power production with direct combustion and a steam cycle.  pyrolysis  pyrolysis is the thermal decomposition of biomass occurring  in the absence of oxygen (anaerobic environment) that  produces a solid (charcoal), a liquid (pyrolysis oil or bio-oil)  and a gas product. the relative amounts of the three coproducts  depend on the operating temperature and the  residence time used in the process. lower temperatures  produce more solid and liquid products and higher  temperatures more biogas. heating the biomass feedstock to  moderate temperatures (450°c to 550°c) produce  oxygenated oils as the major products (70 to 80%), with the  remainder split between a bio char and gases (iea bio-2009).  biological systems  these processes are suitable for very wet biomass materials  such as food or agricultural wastes, including farm animal slurry.  anaerobic digestion  anaerobic digestion means the breakdown of organic waste  by bacteria in an oxygen-free environment. this produces a  biogas typically made up of 65% methane and 35% carbon  dioxide. purified biogas can then be used both for heating  and electricity generation.  fermentation  fermentation is the process by which growing plants with a  high sugar and starch content are broken down with the help of  micro-organisms to produce ethanol and methanol. the end  product is a combustible fuel that can be used in vehicles.  biomass power station capacities typically range up to 15  mW, but larger plants are possible. however bio mass power  station should use the heat as well, in order to use the energy  of the biomass as much as possible, and therefore the size  should not be much larger than 25 mW (electric). this size  could be supplied by local bioenergy and avoid unsustainable  long-distance fuel supply.    biofuels  converting crops into ethanol and bio diesel made from  rapeseed methyl ester (rme) currently takes place mainly in  brazil, the usa and europe. also processes to produce  synthetic fuels from ‘biogenic synthesis’ gases will play a  larger role in the future, especially for aviation and marine  transport systems. theoretically, biofuels can be produced  from any biological carbon source, although the most  common are photosynthetic plants. various plants and plantderived  materials are used for biofuel production.  Globally, biofuels are most commonly used to power vehicles  but can also be used for other purposes. the production and  use of biofuels must result in a net reduction in carbon  emissions compared to the use of traditional fossil fuels to  have a positive effect in climate change mitigation.  sustainable biofuels can reduce the dependency on  petroleum and thereby enhance energy security.  • bioethanol is a fuel manufactured through the fermentation of  sugars. sugars are used directly (sugar cane or beet) or by  breaking down starch in grains such as wheat, rye, barley or  maize. in the european union, bioethanol is mainly produced  from grains, with wheat as the dominant feedstock. in brazil,  the preferred feedstock is sugar cane, whereas in the usa it  is corn (maize). bioethanol produced from cereals has a byproduct,  a protein-rich animal feed called dried distillers  Grains with soluble (ddGs). for every tonne of cereals used  for ethanol production, on average one third will enter the  animal feed stream as ddGs. because of its high protein  level, ddGs is currently used as a replacement for soy cake.  bioethanol can either be blended into gasoline (petrol) directly  or be used in the form of etbe (ethyl tertiary butyl ether).  • biodiesel is a fuel produced from vegetable oil sourced  from rapeseed, sunflower seeds or soybeans along with  used cooking oils or animal fats. if used vegetable oils are  recycled as feedstock for biodiesel production, pollution  from discarded oil is reduced, providing a new way of  transforming a waste product into transport energy. blends  of biodiesel and conventional diesel are the most common  products distributed in the retail transport fuel market.  • most countries use a labelling system to explain the  proportion of biodiesel in any fuel mix. fuel containing 20%  biodiesel is labelled b20, while pure biodiesel is referred to  as b100. blends of 20 % biodiesel with 80 % petroleum  diesel (b20) can generally be used in unmodified diesel  engines. used in its pure form, b100 may require certain  engine modifications. biodiesel can also be used as a  heating fuel in domestic and commercial boilers. older  furnaces may contain rubber parts that would suffer from  biodiesel’s solvent properties but can otherwise burn it  without any conversion.  there are many different biomass feedstock types and  numerous conversion technologies to produce fuels for  heat and/or power and transport technologies; figure  10.12 provides a simplified overview.  1 parts of each feedstock, e.g. crop residues, could also be used in other routes.  2 each route also gives co-products.  3 biomass upgrading includes any one of the densification processses) pelletisation, pyrolysis, torrefaction, etc.)  4 ad = anaerobic digestion    10.4.9 bioenergy and greenhouse gas (ghg) emission  reduction  it is of great importance that bioenergy lower greenhouse gas  emissions; only then does the use of bioenergy make ecologic  sense. the ranges of GhG emissions per unit of energy output  (mj) from major modern bioenergy chains compared to  conventional and selected advanced fossil fuel energy  systems (land use-related net changes in carbon stocks and  land management impacts are excluded) are shown in figure  10.13. commercial and developing (such as algae biofuels,  fischer-tropsch, etc.) systems for biomass and fossil  technologies are illustrated.  greenpeace has a very strict policy in order to use only  sustainable bioenergy in future energy systems.  guidelines for the future use of bioenergy are documented  in chapter 8.    10.4.10 geothermal energy  Geothermal energy is heat derived from underneath the  earth’s crust. in most areas, this heat comes from a long way  down and has mostly dissipated by the time it reaches the  surface, but in some places the geothermal resources are  relatively close to the surface and can be used as nonpolluting  sources of energy. these “hotspots” include the  western part of the usa, west and central eastern europe,  iceland, asia and new Zealand (the pacific rim).  the uses of geothermal energy depend on temperatures. low  and moderate areas temperature areas (less than 90°c or  between 90°c and 150°c, respectively) can be used for their  heat directly, while the highest temperature resources (above  150°c) are suitable only for electric power generation.  today’s total global geothermal generation is approximately  10,700 mW, with nearly one-third in usa (over 3,000 mW),  and the next biggest share in philippines (1,900 mW) and  indonesia (1,200 mW) (ipcc-srren 2012).28  technology and applications  Geothermal energy is currently extracted using wells or other  means that produce hot fluids from either hydrothermal  reservoirs with naturally high permeability or reservoirs  engineered and fractured to extract heat. see below for more  information on these “enhanced geothermal systems”.  production wells discharge hot water and/or steam.  in high-temperature hydrothermal reservoirs, water occurs  naturally underground under pressure in liquid from. as it is  extracted, the pressure drops, and the water is converted to  steam to a turbine that generates electricity. any remaining  hot water may go through the process again to obtain more  steam. the remaining salty water is sent back to the reservoir  through injection wells, sometimes via another system to use  the remaining heat. a few reservoirs, such as the Geysers in  the usa, larderello in italy, matsukawa in japan, and some  indonesian fields, naturally produce steam vapour that can be  used in a turbine. hot water produced from intermediate temperature  hydrothermal or enhanced Geothermal system  (eGs) reservoirs can also be used in heat exchangers to  generate power in a binary cycle, or in direct use  applications. recovered fluids are also injected back into the  reservoir.29 the key technologies are:  exploration and drilling includes estimating where the resource  is, its size and depth with geophysical methods and then  drilling exploration wells to test the resource. today,  geothermal wells are drilled over a range of depths down to 5  km using methods similar to those used for oil and gas.  advances in exploration and drilling can technology can be  expected. for example, if several wells are drilled from the  same pad, it can access more heat resources and minimize  the surface impact.30  reservoir engineering is focused on determining the volume of  geothermal resource and the optimal plant size. the optimum  has to consider sustainable use of the resources and safe,  efficient operation. the modern method of estimating  reserves and sizing power plants is ‘reservoir simulation’ – a  process that starts with a conceptual model followed by a  calibrated, numerical representation.31 then, future behaviour  is forecast under selected load conditions using an algorithm  (such as touGh2) to select the plant size. injection  management looks after the production zones, and uses data  to make sure the hot reservoir rock is re-charged sufficiently.  geothermal power plants use the steam created from heating  water via natural underground sources to power a turbine  that produces electricity. the technique has been used for  decades in the us, new Zealand and iceland and is under  trial in Germany, where it is necessary to drill many kilometres  down to reach high-temperature zones. the basic types of  geothermal power plants in use today are steam-condensing  turbines, binary-cycle units and cogeneration plants.  • steam condensing turbines can be used in flash or drysteam  plants operating at sites with intermediate and high-temperature  resources (≥150°c). the power units usually  have 20 to 110 mWe (dipippo, 2008) and may utilize a  multiple-flash system, obtaining steam at successively  lower pressures to get as much energy as possible from the  geothermal fluid. the only difference between a flash plant  and a dry-steam plant is that the latter does not require  brine separation, resulting in a simpler and cheaper design.  • binary-cycle plants, typically organic rankine cycle (orc)  units, typically extract heat from low and intermediate-temperature  geothermal fluids from hydrothermal and eGs  reservoirs. binary plants are more complex than  condensing ones since the geothermal fluid (water, steam  or both) passes through a heat exchanger to heat another  working fluid (such as isopentane or isobutene), which  vaporises, drives a turbine, and then is air-cooled or  condensed with water. binary plants are often constructed  as smaller, linked modular units (a few mWe each).  • combined or hybrid plants comprise two or more of the  above basic types to improve versatility, increase overall  thermal efficiency, improve load-following capability, and  efficiently cover a wide resource-temperature range.  • cogeneration plants or combined / cascaded heat and  power plants (chp) produce both electricity and hot water  for direct use. they can be used in relatively small  industries and communities of a few thousand people.  iceland, for example, runs geothermal cogeneration plants  with a combined capacity of 580 mWth.32 at the oregon  institute of technology, a chp plant cover most of the  electricity and all the heat demand.33  10.4.11 enhanced geothermal systems (egs)  in some areas, the subsurface regions are ‘stimulated’ to  make use of geothermal energy for power generation. a  reservoir is made by creating or enhancing a network of  fractures in the rock underground so fluid can move between  the injection point and where power is produced (production  wells) (see figure 10.14). heat is extracted by circulating  water through the reservoir in a closed loop; it can be used  for power generation or heating via the technologies  described above. recently developed models provide  insights into geothermal exploration and production. eGs  projects are currently at a demonstration and experimental  stage in a number of countries. the key challenges are  creating enough reservoirs with sufficient volumes for  commercial rates of energy production, while protecting  water resources and avoiding instability of the earth or  seismicity (earthquakes).34    10.4.12 hydropower  Water has been used to produce electricity for about a  century. even today, it covers around one fifth of the world’s  power demand. the main requirement for hydropower is to  create an artificial head of water that has sufficient energy to  power a turbine when diverted into a channel or pipe.  classification by head and size  the ‘head’ in hydropower refers to the difference between the  upstream and the downstream water levels, which  determines the water pressure on the turbines. along with  discharge, the pressure level determines what type of  hydraulic turbine is used. the classification of ‘high head’ and  ‘low head’ varies from country to country, and there is no  generally accepted scale.  broadly, pelton impulse turbines are used for high heads  (where a jet of water hits a turbine and reverses direction).  francis reaction turbines are used to exploit medium heads  (which run full of water and in effect generate hydrodynamic  ‘lift’ to propel the turbine blades). for low heads, kaplan and  bulb turbines are applied.  classification according to refers to installed capacity measured  in mW. small-scale hydropower plants are more likely to be runof-  river facilities than are larger hydropower plants, but reservoir  (storage) hydropower stations of all sizes use the same basic  components and technologies. it typically takes less time and  effort to construct and integrate small hydropower schemes  into local environments35 so their deployment is increasing in  many parts of the world. small schemes are often considered in  remote areas where other energy sources are not viable or are  not economically attractive.  greenpeace supports the sustainability criteria  developed by the international rivers network  ().  classification by facility type  hydropower plants are also classified in the following  categories according to operation and type of flow:  • run-of-river (ror)  • storage (reservoir)  • pumped storage, and  • in-stream technology, a young and less-developed  technology.  run-of-river  these plants draw the energy for electricity mainly from the  available flow of the river and do not collect significant  amounts of stored water. they may include some short-term  storage (hourly, daily), but the generation profile will generally  be dictated by local river flow conditions. because generation  depends on rainfall, it may have substantial daily, monthly or  seasonal variations, especially when located in small rivers or  streams with widely varying flows. in a typical plant, a portion  of the river water might be diverted to a channel or pipeline  (penstock) to convey the water to a hydraulic turbine  connected to an electricity generator (see figure 10.16). ror  projects may form cascades along a river valley, often with a  reservoir-type hydropower plants in the upper reaches of the  valley. run-of-river installation is relatively inexpensive.  facilities typically have lower environmental impacts than  similar-sized storage hydropower plants.  storage hydropower  hydropower projects with a reservoir are also called storage  hydropower. the reservoir reduces dependence on the  variability of inflow, and the generating stations are located at  the dam toe or further downstream, connected to the  reservoir through tunnels or pipelines (figure 10.17).  reservoirs are designed according to the landscape. in many  parts of the world, river valleys are inundated to make an  artificial lake. in geographies with mountain plateaus, highaltitude  lakes are another kind of reservoir that retains many  of the properties of the original lake. in these settings, the  generating station is often connected to the reservoir lake via  tunnels (lake tapping). for example, in scandinavia, natural  high-altitude lakes create high pressure systems where the  heads may reach over 1,000 m. a storage power plant may  have tunnels coming from several reservoirs and may also be  connected to neighbouring watersheds or rivers. large  hydroelectric power plants with concrete dams and extensive  collecting lakes often have very negative effects on the  environment, requiring the flooding of habitable areas.  pumped storage  pumped storage plants generate electricity but are energy  storage devices. in such a system, water is pumped from a  lower reservoir into an upper reservoir (figure 10.18), usually  during off-peak hours when electricity is cheap. the flow is  reversed to generate electricity during the daily peak load  period or at other times of need. the plant is a net energy  consumer overall, because it uses power to pump water;  however, the plant provides system benefits by helping to  meet fluctuating demand profiles. pumped storage is the  largest-capacity form of grid energy storage now readily  available worldwide.  248    in-stream technology using existing facilities  to optimize existing facilities like weirs, barrages, canals or  falls, small turbines or hydrokinetic turbines can be installed  for electricity generation. these basically function like a runof-  river scheme, as shown in figure 10.19. hydrokinetic  devices being developed to capture energy from tides and  currents may also be deployed inland for free-flowing rivers  and engineered waterways.  hydropower – future developments  a relatively small number of equipment suppliers dominate  the market for large hydropower plants (above 10  megawatts). the basic equipment remains the same, though  it has improved efficiency, with additional services ranging  from monitoring and diagnostics to advanced control  systems. more r&d is needed to produce further progress  and reduce the considerable impact of large hydropower on  environmental systems and local communities (irena-hydro-  2015).36 the local population must be consulted before  projects are further developed.  there are 3 classes of hydro power plants:  • large hydropower (>10 mWelectric);  • small hydropower (≤10 mWelectric)  • mini-hydro (100 kWe to 1 mWelectric)  small-scale hydropower (from 1 mW to 10 mW) has a much  wider range of designs, equipment, and material. therefore,  expertise in a wider range of fields is crucial towards tapping  the potential of local resources affordably and without a  detrimental environmental impact (irena-hydro-2015).  upgrades are an excellent way of getting more energy from  existing hydropower facilities – and often the least-cost  option. realistically, 5-10 percent more electricity can be  generated at modest cost. legal and technical hurdles may,  however, hamper repowering, for instance when there is  limited documentation from decades ago. today, it is possible  to accurately analyse local geology and hydrology in advance  in order to assess potential gains from upgrades (irenahydro-  2015). in energy [r]evolution scenarios, up-grading of  existing hydropower plants is of particular importance and  preferred to new builds, especially for large power plants.  greenpeace does not support large hydropower stations  that require large dams and flooding areas but does  support small-scale run-of-river power plants.  10.4.13 ocean energy  wave energy  in wave power generation, a structure interacts with the  incoming waves, converting this energy to electricity through  a hydraulic, mechanical or pneumatic power take-off system.  the structure is moored or placed directly on the  seabed/seashore. power is transmitted to the seabed by a  flexible submerged electrical cable and to shore by a sub-sea  cable. Wave power can potentially provide a predictable  supply of energy and does not create much visual impact.  many wave energy technologies are at an early phase of  conceptual development and testing. power plants designs  vary to deal with different wave motion (heaving, surging,  pitching) water depths (deep, intermediate, shallow) and  distance from shore (shoreline, near-shore, offshore).  shoreline devices are fixed to the coast or embedded in the  shoreline. near-shore devices work at depths of 20-25 m to  ~500 m from the shore, where there are stronger, more  productive waves. offshore devices exploit the more powerful  waves in water over 25 m deep (ipcc-srren 2012).37 no  particular technology is dominant for wave power. several  different systems are being prototyped and tested at sea,  with most development being carried out in uk.    a generic scheme for characterizing ocean wave energy  generation devices consists of primary, secondary and  tertiary conversion stages,38 which refer to the conversions of  kinetic energy (in water) to mechanical energy, and then to  electrical energy in the generator. recent reviews have  identified more than 50 wave energy devices at various  stages of development,39 and we have not explored the limits  of size in practice.  utility-scale electricity generation from wave energy will  require arrays of devices, and like wind turbines, devices are  likely to be chosen for specific site conditions. Wave power  converters can be made up from connected groups of smaller  generator units of 100 – 500 kW, or several mechanical or  hydraulically interconnected modules can supply a single  larger turbine generator unit of 2 – 20 mW. however, large  waves needed to make the technology more cost effective  are mostly a long way from shore which would require costly  sub-sea cables to transmit the power. the converters  themselves also take up large amounts of space.  Wave energy systems may be categorised by their genus,  location and principle of operation as shown in figure 10.20.  oscillating water columns  oscillating water columns use wave motion to induce different  pressure levels between the air-filled chamber and the  atmosphere.40 air is pushed at high speed through an air turbine  coupled to an electrical generator (figure 10.21), creating a pulse  when the wave advances and recedes, as the air flows in two  directions. the air turbine rotates in the same direction, regardless  of the flow. a device can be: a fixed structure above the breaking  waves (cliff-mounted or part of a breakwater); bottom-mounted  near shore; or it can be a floating system moored in deeper waters.  oscillating-body systems  oscillating-body systems use the incident wave motion to make  two bodies move in oscillation to drive the power take-off  system.41 they can be surface devices or, less often, fully  submerged. surface flotation devices are generally referred to  as ‘point absorbers’, because they are non-directional. some  oscillating body devices are fully submerged and rely on  oscillating hydrodynamic pressure to extract the wave energy.  lastly, hinged devices sit on the seabed relatively close to shore  and harness the horizontal surge energy of incoming waves.  overtopping devices  overtopping devices convert wave energy into potential  energy by collecting surging waves into a water reservoir at a  level above the free water surface.42 the reservoir drains  down through a conventional low-head hydraulic turbine.  these systems can float offshore or be incorporated into  shorelines or man-made breakwaters (figure 10.23).  250    power take-off systems  power take-off systems are used to convert the kinetic  energy, air flow or water flow generated by the wave energy  device into a useful form, usually electricity. a large number  of different technology options are described in the  literature.43 the overall concept is that real-time wave  oscillations will produce corresponding electrical power  oscillations. in practice, some method of short-term energy  storage (in seconds) may be needed to smooth energy  delivery. these devices would probably be deployed in arrays  because the cumulative power generated by several devices  will be smoother than from a single device.    tidal range  tidal range hydropower has been tested in estuarine  developments where a barrage encloses an estuary, which  creates a single reservoir (basin) behind it with conventional  low-head hydro turbines in the barrage. alternative  configurations of multiple barrages have been proposed where  basins are filled and emptied at different times, with turbines  located between the basins. multi-basin schemes may offer  more flexible power generation availability than normal schemes  because they could generate power almost continuously.  recent developments focus on single or multiple offshore  basins away from estuaries (‘tidal lagoons’), which could  provide more flexible capacity and output with little or no  impact on delicate estuarine environments. this technology  uses commercially available systems. the conversion  mechanism most widely used to produce electricity from tidal  range is the bulb-turbine.44 examples of power plants with  bulb turbines technology include a 240 mW power plant at la  rance in northern france45 and the 254 mW sihwa barrage in  the republic of korea, which is nearing completion.46  some favourable sites with very gradually sloping coastlines  are well suited to tidal range power plants, such as the severn  estuary between southwest england and south Wales.  current feasibility studies there include options such as  barrages and tidal lagoons. the average capacity factor for  tidal power stations has been estimated from 22.5% to 35%.47  tidal and ocean currents  to capture energy from tidal currents, a device can be fitted  underwater to a column fixed to the sea bed with a rotor to  generate electricity from fast-moving currents, technologies  that extract kinetic energy from tidal and ocean currents are  under development; tidal energy converters are the most  common to date, designed to generate as the tide travels in  both directions. devices types include axial-flow turbines,  cross-flow turbines and reciprocating devices. axial-flow  turbines (figure 10.26 see below) work on a horizontal axis,  while cross-flow turbines may operate about a vertical axis  (figure 10.27 see below) or a horizontal axis with or without  a shroud to accentuate the flow. a single unit can have  multiple turbines (figure 10.27).  marine turbine designs look somewhat like wind turbines but  must contend with reversing flows, cavitation and harsh  underwater marine conditions (salt water corrosion, debris,  fouling, etc.). axial flow turbines must be able to respond to  reversing flow directions, while cross-flow turbines continue  to operate regardless of current flow direction. rotor shrouds  (also known as cowlings or ducts) can enhance  hydrodynamic performance by increasing the speed of water  through the rotor and reducing losses at the tips. some  technologies in the conceptual stage of development are  based on reciprocating devices incorporating hydrofoils or  tidal sails. two prototype oscillating devices have been  trialled at open sea locations in the uk.48  the development of tidal current resources will require  multiple machines deployed in a similar fashion to a wind  farm, and siting will need to take into account wake effects.    capturing the energy of open-ocean current systems is likely to  require the same basic technology as for tidal flows but with  some different infrastructure. deep-water applications may  require neutrally buoyant turbine/generator modules with  mooring lines and anchor systems. they could also be attached  to other structures, such as offshore platforms.50 these  modules will also have hydrodynamic lifting designs to allow for  optimal and flexible vertical positioning.51 systems to capture  energy from open ocean current systems may have larger  rotors, as there is no restriction based on the channel size.  ocean energy – future developments  ocean energy can play a significant role for the power supply  of islands and coastal regions. a combination with offshore  wind farms, ocean energy power plants might help to  integrate larger shares of flexible one-shore and/or solar  photovoltaic electricity. Greenpeace supports the  developments of ocean energy in a sustainable manner.      infrastructure for renewables  With increasing market shares of renewable power  generation, there will be less space for base load power  plants. as a result conventional power plants cannot run in  base load mode anymore, which increases costs of operation  and therefore lowers the profit on each kWh sold. the  integration of large-scale renewable energy requires a variety  of existing grid technologies applied in a new context and  with new operational concepts. this section provides a short  overview of technologies and operational concepts used for  the integration of large shares of renewables and are based  on Greenpeace international’s reports about power grids  published between 2009 and 2014 (Gpi- en 2014).52  smart-grid technology will play a significant role, in particular  by integrating demand-side management into power system  operation. the future power supply will not consist of a few  centralized power plants, but of numerous smaller generation  units, such as solar panels, wind turbines and other  renewable units, partly on the distribution network and partly  concentrated in large power plants (such as offshore wind  farms). smart-grid solutions will help to monitor and integrate  this diversity into power system operation and at the same  time will make interconnection simpler.  the tradeoff is that power system planning will become more  complex due to the larger number of generation assets and  the significant share of variable power generation causing  constantly changing power flows in the power systems.  smart-grid technology will be needed to support power  system planning, i.e. actively support day-ahead planning  and power system balancing by providing real-time  information about the status of the network and the  generation units in combination with weather forecasts.  smart-Grid technology will also play a significant role in  making sure systems can meet the peak demand at all times.  smart-Grid technology will make better use of distribution  and transmission assets, thereby limiting the need for  transmission network extension to the absolute minimum.  smart grids use information and communication  technology (ict) to enable a power system based on  renewable energy sources.  ict in smart grids is used to:  • easily interconnect a large number of renewable generation  assets into the power system (plug and play)  • create a more flexible power system through large-scale  demand-side management and by integrating storage to  balance the impact of variable renewable generation resources  • provide the system operator with a better information about  the state of the system, which so they can operate the  system more efficiently  • minimize network upgrades using of network assets  efficiently and supporting an efficient coordination of power  generation over very large geographic areas needed for  renewable energy generation.  10.5.1 demand side management  in reality, load varies over time which means that additional  flexible power generation resources are required to provide  the right amount of power. for rural areas, typical  technologies are combined-cycle gas turbines (ccGt) or  hydro-power stations with a sufficient storage capacity to  follow the daily load variations. in conventional island power  systems, typically a number of small diesel generators (gensets)  are used to provide 24/7 supply. several gen-sets have  to operate continuously at the point of their highest efficiency,  while one is used to follow the load variations.  the impact of adding renewable power generation to a  conventionally centralized or island power system will affect  the way in which a conventionally designed electricity system  runs. the level of impact depends on the renewable energy  technology: biomass, geothermal-, concentrated solar- and  hydropower with storage can regulate power output and  therefore can supply base load as well as peak load.  hydropower without storage (run–of- river), photovoltaic and  wind power depends on the available natural resources, so  the power output is variable. sometimes these renewable  energy sources are sometimes described as ‘intermittent’  power sources; however, the terminology is not correct as  intermittent stands for uncontrollable, i.e. non-dispatchable,  but the power output of these generation plants can be  forecast, so they can be dispatched.  furthermore, they can always be ramped down if  needed.there are two main types of impacts to consider  when introducing renewable energy to micro-grids: the  balancing impact and reliability impact.  balancing impact to relates to the short-term adjustments  needed to manage fluctuations over a period ranging from  minutes to hours before the time of delivery. in power systems  without variable power generation, there can be a mismatch  between demand and supply. the reasons could be that the  energy load was not forecast correctly, or a conventional  power plant is not operating as it is scheduled, for instance  when a power station trips due to a technical problem.  adding a variable power generation source increases the risk  that the forecast power generation in the power system will not  be reached, for instance due to a weather system moving  faster than predicted into the area. the overall impact on the  system depends on how large and how widely distributed the  variable power sources are. a certain amount of wind power  distributed over a larger geographical area will have a lower  254    impact on system balancing than the same amount of wind  power concentrated in one single location, as geographical  distribution will smoothen out the renewable power generation.  system balancing is relevant to:  • Day-ahead planning, which needs to make sure that sufficient  generation is available to match expected demand taking  into account forecasted generation from variable power  generation sources (typically 12 to 36 hours ahead);  • short-term system balancing, which allocates balancing  resources to cover events such as a mismatch between  forecasted generation/demand or sudden loss of  generation (typically seconds to hours ahead planning).  in island power systems, both aspects must be handled  automatically by the system.  reliability impact is the extent to which sufficient generation  will be available to meet peak demands at all times. no  electricity system can be 100% reliable, since there will  always be a small chance of major failures in power stations  or transmission lines when demand is high. as renewable  power production is often more distributed than conventional  large-scale power plants, it reduces the risk of sudden dropouts  of major individual production units. on the other hand,  variable renewable power generation reduces the probability  that generation is available at the time of high demand, thus  adding complexity to system planning.  reliability is important for long-term system planning, which  assesses the system adequacy typically two to 10 years  ahead. long-term system planning with variable generation  sources is a challenge, because of the actual geographical  location of the resource. to get a high level of renewable  energy into the system, it ideally must be situated at some  distance from each other, for example using solar power from  southern europe when there is no or limited wind power  available in northern europe.  in island power systems, all power generation is typically  close to each other, which means that there must be a mix of  different generation technologies in the island system or that  they must be partly over-designed to make sure that there is  always sufficient generation capacity available. this is  typically done by adding some back-up diesel gen-sets. in  addition, island power systems can adjust power demand to  meet power supply, rather than the other way round. this  approach is called demand-side management. an example of  a “flexible” load in island systems for demand-side  management is water pumps and irrigation pumps, which can  be turned on and off depending on how much electricity  supply there is.  10.5.2 “overlay” or “super grid” – the interconnection  of smart grids  based on the current technology development of energy  storage technologies, it is difficult to envision that energy  storage could provide a comprehensive solution to this  challenge. While different storage technologies such as  electrochemical batteries are already available today, it is not  clear whether large-scale electricity storage, other than  pumped hydropower described in the previous section, will  become technically and economically viable.  feasible storage systems would have to cover most of the  european electricity supply during up to two successive  weeks of low solar radiation and little wind – difficult to  envision based on current technology development. to  design a power system that can adequately react to such  extreme situations, a substantial amount of planning is  needed in order to ensure available generation capacity  together with sufficient network capacity to match demand.  different timescales must be considered:  • long-term system plans to assess the system adequacy  over the coming years (typically a time horizon of 2 to 10  years ahead)  • day-ahead planning, making sure that sufficient generation  is available to match expected demand (typically 12 to 36  hours ahead)  • short-term balancing, covering events such as a mismatch  between forecasted generation/demand or sudden loss of  generation (typically seconds to hours-ahead planning)  benefits of a super grid  starting around 1920, each load center in europe had its own  isolated power system. With the development of transmission  lines using higher voltages, the transport of power over larger  distances became feasible. soon, the different centers were  interconnected. in the beginning, only stations in the same  region were interconnected. over the years, technology  developed further, and maximum possible transmission line  voltage increased step by step.  there were two main drivers of extending network structure:  • larger transmission networks and high voltage lines meant  suppliers could follow the aggregated demand of a large  number of customers, instead of the demand variation of  one customer - which can change significantly over time -  with one generation resource. the demand of those  aggregated customers became easier to predict and  generation scheduling therefore significantly easier.  • the larger transmission networks created economies of  scale by installing larger generation units. in the 1930s, the  most cost-effective size of thermal power stations was  about 60 mW. in the 1950s, it was 180 mW, and by the  1980s about 1,000 mW. this approach made only    is less than With hvac overhead lines.  economic sense because extending the power system was  cheaper than adding local generation capacity.  the approach includes some major risks, like the failure of a  large power station or the interruption of a major transmission  line, which can interrupt of the power system over a large  area. to be better prepared for such situations national  transmission systems in europe and elsewhere were  interconnected across borders. countries can help each  other in case of emergency situations by cooperating in the  organization of spinning reserve, reserve capacity and  frequency control.  shifting to an energy mix with over 90% of the electricity  supply coming from renewable energy sources will also  require a significant redesign of the transmission network to  adapt to the needs of the new generation structure. the right  kind of grid provides an economic, reliable and sustainable  energy supply.  in principal, over-sizing local generation locally would reduce  the need for large-scale renewable generation elsewhere as  well as upgrading the transmission network. in this case the  local power system will evolve into a hybrid system that can  operate without any outside support.  however, making local plants bigger (over-sized) is less  economical than installing large-scale renewable energy  plants at a regional scale and integrating them into the power  system via extended transmission lines. the allocation of  70% distributed renewable generation and 30% large-scale  renewable generation is not based on a detailed technical or  economic optimization; in each location, the optimum mix is  specific to local conditions. further detailed studies on  regional levels will be needed to better quantify the split  between distributed and large-scale renewable generation  better.  an appropriately designed transmission system is the  solution in both cases as it can be used to transmit the  required electricity from areas with surplus of generation to  areas that have an electricity deficit.  in general, the transmission system must be designed to  cope with:  • long-term issues: extreme variations in the availability of  natural resources from one year to another; for instance,  the output of wind turbines in any given area can vary by up  to 30% from one year to the next. for hydropower, the  variations can be even larger  • medium-term issues: extreme combinations in the availability  of natural resources, such as no wind over main parts of  europe during the winter, when solar radiation is low  • short-term issues: significant mismatch between  forecasted wind or solar production and actual production  with significant impact on power system operation in the  range of 15 minutes to 3 hours  • loss of a significant amount of generation due to  unscheduled break-down or network interruption, impact  within milliseconds. the mainland european power system  is currently designed to cope with a maximum sudden  generation loss of 3,000 mW. Whether this level is sufficient  for the future depends, for example, on the maximum  transmission capacity of a single transmission line. most  likely the maximum transmission capacity of a single  transmission in the future hvdc super Grid will exceed a  capacity of 3,000 mW; hence, sufficient spare generation  and/or network capacity must be considered when  redesigning the power system (considered in the simulation  report by loading the super Grid to a maximum of 70%).  super grid transmission options  in principal different technical options exists for the redesign  of the onshore transmission network. in the following, the  following technical options are briefly presented, followed by  a general comparison.  • hvac (high voltage alternating current)  • hvdc lcc (high voltage direct current system using line  commutated converter)  • hvdc vsc (high voltage direct current system using  voltage source converter)  • other technical solutions  10.5.3 hvac  high voltage ac transmission (hvac) using overhead lines  has become a leading technology in electrical networks.53 its  advantage is in using transformers to increase the typical,  rather low voltage from the generators to higher voltage  levels, which is a significantly cheaper approach than the  ac/dc converter stations for the hvdc technologies.  transmission over long distances with low or medium voltage  will result in high and prohibitively expensive losses, so high  voltage ac (400 kv or more) over medium distance (a few  hundred kilometers) is typically the most cost effective  solution. as ac systems develop, there are increases in  transmission voltage. typically, doubling the voltage  quadruples the power transfer capability. consequently, the  evolution of grids in most countries is characterized by the  addition of network layers of higher and higher voltages.  today, the highest hvac voltage used is around 800 kv for  overhead lines. the canadian company hydro Quebec, for  instance, operates a massive 735 kv transmission system  using overhead lines; the first line was in operation 1965.  1000 kv and 1200 kv ac has been tested in several test-    installations and even short-term commercial applications.  there are several challenges involved in building such lines  and new equipment needing to be developed includes  transformers, breakers, transformers, and switches.  the major advantage of an ac-based system is the flexibility  with which loads and generation along the route can be  connected. this is especially important if the transmission  route passes through a highly populated area and if many  local generation facilities are located at many places along  the route. the disadvantage of hvac systems are the  comparatively high costs for transmission of large capacity (>  1,000 mW) over very long distances (> 1000 km) due to the  additional equipment required for keeping the voltage level on  the overhead lines, for instance.  10.5.4 hvdc lcc  the advantage of line commutated converter (lcc) high  voltage dc (hvdc) connections is certainly their proven track  record. the first commercial lcc hvdc link was installed in  1954 between the island of Gotland and the swedish  mainland. the link was 96 km long, rated at 20 mW, and used  a 100 kv submarine cable. since then, lcc based hvdc  technology has been installed in many locations in the world,  primarily for bulk power transmission over long geographical  distances and for interconnecting power systems, such as  island systems in japan and new Zealand. other well-known  examples for conventional hvdc technology are:  • the 1,354 km pacific interie dc link with a rating of 3,100  mW at a dc voltage of ± 500 kv  • the itaipu link between brazil and paraguay, rated at 6,300  mW at a dc voltage of ± 600 kv (2 bipoles x 3,150 mW)  the total conversion efficiency from ac to dc and back to ac  using the two converters lies in the range of 97 to 98 % and  depends on the design details of the converter stations. a  system design with a 98 % efficiency will have higher  investment costs compared to a design with lower efficiency.  the advantage of an lcc hvdc solution are comparatively  low losses – in the order of 2-3 % for a 500 mW transmission  over 100 km, including losses in converters and transmission.  in addition, the higher transmission capacity of a single cable  compared to hvac transmission and voltage source  converter transmission can be an advantage when  transmitting large capacities. the disadvantage of the hvdc  lcc design is lack of power system support capability.  typically, a strong hvac network is required on both sites of  the hvdc lcc connection. hence, building up an entire  hvdc back-bone network using hvdc lcc technology that  has to support the underlying hvac network is technically  challenging and only possible with the installation of  additional equipment such as statcoms (= static  synchronous compensator).  10.5.5 hvdc vsc  the voltage source converter (vsc) based hvdc technology is  capturing more and more attention. this comparatively new  technology has only become possible due to advances in high  power electronics, namely insulated Gate bipolar transistors  (iGbts). pulse Width modulation (pWm) can then be used for the  vsc converter, as opposed to the thyristor line-commutated  converters used in conventional hvdc technology.  the first commercial vsc-based hvdc link was installed by  abb on the swedish island of Gotland in 1999. it is 70 km  long, with 60 mva at ± 80 kv. the link was mainly built in order  to provide voltage support for the large amount of wind power  installed in the south of Gotland. today about 10 vsc-based  hvdc links are in operation world-wide. key projects are:  • in 2000, the murraylink was built in australia with a length  of almost 180 km. this connection was the longest vscbased  hvdc link in the world until 2009. it has a capacity  of 220 mva at a dc voltage of ±150 kv  • the bard offshore 1 project borWind in Germany connects  a 400 mW offshore wind farm to the onshore grid using a  203 km long cable, operating at a dc voltage of ±150 kv  • the longest hvdc vsc project is the caprivi link in  namibia. it is 970 km long and operates at ±350 kv, the  highest voltage level used so far for hvdc vsc projects, to  transmit a capacity of 300 mW.  the total efficiency of a vsc-based hvdc system is slightly  less than that of a lcc hvdc system, but efficiency is  expected to improve with future technical development. also,  rating per converter is presently limited to approximately 400-  500 mW, while the cable rating at +/-150 kv is 600 mW. more  cable and converter stations are required for a vsc-based  hvdc solution compared to an lcc-based hvdc solution;  however, manufacturers are already working on converter  stations with higher ratings and increased cable ratings. the  significant advantages of vsc-based hvdc solutions are its  power system support capabilities, such as independent  control of active and reactive power. in addition, a vscbased  hvdc link does not require a strong ac network, it can  even start up against a non-load network. building up a vscbased  hvdc backbone network will be technically easier  than using lcc-based hvdc technology. however, multiterminal  vsc hvdc systems are also new for the power  system industry, so there will a learning curve to achieve it.    comparison of transmission solutions  table 10.2 compares the three standard transmission  solutions. the technical capabilities of each system can  probably be improved by adding additional equipment to the  overall system solution.  the cost of transmitting electricity is dominated by the  investment cost of the transmission lines and by the  electricity losses during transmission. at present, overhead  lines are predominant since costs of overhead lines are about  20 % of that for ground cables. the transmission losses of  hvac overhead lines are roughly twice as high as those of  hvdc. on the one hand, the cost of overhead lines is similar  for the lower voltage level, but at 800 kv hvdc lines are  much less expensive than comparable ac lines. on the other  hand, ac/dc converter stations for hvdc technology are  considerably more expensive than the transformer stations of  ac systems. therefore, for shorter distances and lower  voltages ac is typically the most economical solution, while  hvdc lines are applied at distances well over 500 km.  258    the most economical system design is typically a  combination of hvac and hvdc technology. hvac is a cost-effective  and flexible solution over medium distances (up to  1,000 km), for instance to distribute power along the route to  different load centers or to collect locally distributed  generation and transmit the surplus electricity to other  regions. hvdc technology can be used as an overlaying  network structure to transmit bulk power, i.e. large capacity,  over long distances to the areas where the energy is needed.  an hvdc super Grid will have only a very limited number of  connection points, because the substation (converter station)  costs are significant.  in addition, an hvac solution will require significantly more  lines than hvdc solutions. the transmission of 10,000 mW or  10 GW, for instance, can be achieved with two lines using  800 kv and applying lcc hvdc technology, while transmitting  the same power with 800 kv ac would require five lines. for a  given transmission capacity of 10 GW, the space requirement  of hvdc overhead lines can be four times lower than that of  hvac lines (figure 10.29). While an 800 kv hvac line would  require a width of 425 meters over the total length of a power  link of 10 GW, a hvdc line of the same capacity would only  require a width of 100 meters. there are thus considerable  differences in the environmental impact of both technologies.  a final advantage of using hvdc technology is that it is easier  to move the entire hvdc super grid underground by using  hvdc cables. this approach will be more costly, but  following existing transporting routes (laying the cables along  motorways, railway tracks or even in rivers) will allow a fast  roll-out of the hvdc supergrid infrastructure and reduce the  visual impact of the installation.  10.6 renewable heating and cooling  technologies  renewable heating and cooling has a long tradition in human  culture. heat can come from the sun (solar thermal), the earth  (geothermal), ambient heat and plant matter (biomass). solar  heat for drying processes and wood stoves for cooking have  been used for so long that they are labeled “traditional”, but  today’s technologies are far from old-fashioned. over the last  decade, there have been improvements to a range of  traditional applications, many of which are already  economically competitive with fossil-fuel based technologies  or starting to be.  this chapter presents the current range of renewable heating  and cooling technologies and gives a short outlook of the  most sophisticated technologies, integrating multiple  suppliers and users in heat networks or even across various  renewable energy sources in heating and cooling systems.  some of the emerging areas for this technology are space  heating / cooling and industrial process heat.  10.6.1 solar thermal technologies  solar thermal energy has been used for the production of  heat for centuries but has become more popular and  developed commercially for the last thirty years. solar thermal  collecting systems are based on a centuries-old principle: the  sun heats up water contained in a dark vessel.  the technologies on the market now are efficient and highly  reliable, providing energy for a wide range of applications in  domestic and commercial buildings, swimming pools, for  industrial process heat, in cooling and the desalination for  drinking water.  although mature products exist to provide domestic hot water  and space heating using solar energy, in most countries they  are not yet the norm. a big step towards an energy  [r]evolution is integrating solar thermal technologies into  buildings at the design stage or when the heating (and cooling)  system is being replaced, lowering the installation cost.  swimming pool heating  pools can make simple use of free heating, using unglazed  water collectors. they are mostly made of plastic, have no  insulation and reach temperatures just a few degrees above  ambient temperature. collectors used for heating swimming  pools and are either installed on the ground or on a nearby  rooftop; and they pump swimming pool water through the  collector directly. the size of such a system depends on the  size of the pool as well as the seasons in which the pool is  used. the collector area needed is about 50 % to 70 % of the  pool surface. the average size of an unglazed water collector  system installed in europe is about 200 m2.54  figure 10.29 | comparison of the required number  of parallel pylons and space to transfer 10 gw of  electric capacity    domestic hot water systems  the major application of solar thermal heating so far is for  domestic hot water systems. depending on the conditions  and the system’s configuration, most of a building’s hot water  requirements can be provided by solar energy. larger systems  can additionally cover a substantial part of the energy needed  for space heating. two major collector types are:  vacuum tubes  the absorber inside the vacuum tube absorbs radiation from  the sun and heats up the fluid inside. additional radiation is  picked up from the reflector behind the tubes. Whatever the  angle of the sun, the round shape of the vacuum tube allows  it to reach the absorber. even on a cloudy day, when the light  is coming from many angles at once, the vacuum tube  collector can still be effective. most of the world’s installed  systems are this type, especially in the world’s largest market:  china. this collector type consists of a row of evacuated glass  tubes with the absorber placed inside. due to the evacuated  environment, there are less heat losses. the systems can  reach operating temperatures of at least 120 °c; however, the  typical use of this collector type is in the range of 60°c to  80°c. evacuated tube collectors are more efficient than  standard flat-plate collectors but generally also more costly.  flat plate or flat panel  this is basically a box with a glass cover which sits on the  roof like a skylight. inside is a series of copper or aluminium  tubes with copper fins attached. the entire structure is  coated in a black substance designed to capture the sun’s  rays. in general, flat plate collectors are not evacuated. they  can reach temperatures of about 30°c to 80°c55 and are the  most common collector type in europe.  there are two different way how the water flow is handle in  solar heating, which influences the overall system cost.  thermo-siphon systems  the simple form of a thermo-siphon solar thermal system uses  gravity as a natural way to transfer hot water from the collector  to the storage tank. no pump or control station is needed, and  many are applied as direct systems without a heat exchanger,  which reduces system costs. the thermo-siphon is relatively  compact, making installation and maintenance quite easy. the  storage tank of a thermo-siphon system is usually applied right  above the collector on the rooftop and directly exposed to the  seasons. these systems are typical in warm climates, due to  their lower efficiency compared with forced circulation  systems. the most common problems are heat losses and the  risk of freezing; they are therefore not suitable for areas where  temperatures drop below freezing. in southern europe, a  system like this is capable of providing almost the total hot  water demand of a household. however, the largest market for  thermo-siphon systems is china. in europe, thermo-siphon  solar hot water systems are 95% of private installations in  Greece56, followed by 25% and 15% of newly installed systems  in italy and spain newly in 2009.57  260    pumped systems  the majority of systems installed in europe are forced  circulation (pumped) systems, which are far more complex  and expensive than thermosiphon systems. typically, the  storage tank is situated inside the house (for instance in the  cellar). an automatic control pump circulates the water  between the storage tank and the collector. forced circulation  systems are normally installed with a heat exchanger, which  means they have two circuits. they are mostly used in areas  with low outside temperatures, and antifreeze additives might  have to be added to the solar circuit to protect the water from  freezing and destroying the collector.  even though forced circulation systems are more efficient  than thermosiphon systems, they are mostly not capable of  supplying the full hot water demand in cold areas and are  usually combined with a back-up system, such as heat  pumps, pellet heaters or conventional gas or oil boilers. the  solar coverage of a system is the share of energy provided by  the solar system in relation to total heat consumption, such  as space heating or hot water. solar coverage levels depend  on the heat demand, the outside temperature and the system  design. for hot water production, a solar coverage of 60% in  central europe is common at the current state of technology  development. the typical collector area installed for a  domestic hot water system in a single family house in the eu  27 is 3-6 m2. for multifamily houses and hotels, the size of  installations is much bigger, with a typical size of 50 m2.58,59,60  domestic heat systems  besides domestic hot water systems, solar thermal energy for  space heating systems is becoming increasingly relevant in  european countries. in fact, the eu 28 is the largest market for  this application at the moment, with Germany and austria as the  main driving forces. the collectors used for these applications  are, however, the same as for domestic hot water systems for  solar space heating purposes, though only pumped systems are  suitable. effectively most systems used are so called combisystems  that provide space as well as water heating.  so far, most installations are built on single-family houses with  a typical system size between 6 and 16 m2 and a typical  annual solar coverage of 25 % in central europe.58,59,60  solar combi-systems for multiple family houses are not yet used  very frequently. these systems are about 50 m2, cost  approximately 470-550 €/m2 and have annual solar coverage of  25% in central europe.58,59,60 large scale solar thermal  applications connected to a local or district heating grids with a  collector area above 500 m2 are not so common. however, since  1985, an increasing number of such systems have been installed  per year in the eu with a typical annual solar coverage of 15 % in  central europe.58,59,60 to get a significant solar share, large storage  is needed. the typical solar coverage of such a system including  storage is around 50 % today. With seasonal storage, the  coverage may be increased to about 80 %.59 another option for  domestic heating systems is air collector systems (not described  here). the largest markets for air collectors are in north america  and asia; these systems have a very small penetration on the  european market, though it has been increasing in recent years.  process heat  solar thermal use for industrial process heat is receiving some  attention for development, although it is hardly in use today.  standardized systems are not available because industrial  processes are often individually designed. also, solar thermal  applications are mostly not capable of providing 100 % of the  heat required over a year, so another non-solar heat source  would be necessary for commercial use.  depending on the temperature level needed, different  collectors have been developed to serve the requirements for  process heat. flat plates or evacuated tube collectors provide  a temperature range up to 80 °c. a large number are available  on the market. for temperatures between 80°c and 120°c  advanced flat-plate collectors are available, such as with  multiple glazing, antireflective coatings, evacuated tubes, and  an inert gas filling. other options are flat-plate and evacuated  tube collectors with compound parabolic concentrators  (cpc). these collectors can be stationary and are generally  constructed to concentrate solar radiation by a factor of 1 to  2. they can use most diffuse radiation, which makes them  especially attractive for areas with low direct solar radiation.  there are a few conceptual designs to reach higher  temperatures between 80°c and 180°c, primarily using a  parabolic trough or linear concentrating fresnel collectors.  these collector types have a higher concentration factor than  cpc collectors, are only capable of using direct solar  radiation, and have to be combined with sun tracking  systems. the collectors especially designed for heat use are  most suitable for a temperature range between 150°c and  250 °c.61 air collector systems for process heat are limited to  lower temperatures, being mostly used for to drying purposes  (hay, etc.); they are not discussed here.  cooling  solar chillers use thermal energy to produce cooling and/or  dehumidify the air in a similar way to a refrigerator or  conventional air-conditioning. this application is well-suited to  solar thermal energy, as the demand for cooling is often  greatest when there is most sunshine. solar cooling has been  successfully demonstrated. large-scale use can be expected  in the future but is still not common.    the option to use solar heat this way makes sense because  hot regions require more cooling for comfort. solar thermal  cooling is mostly designed as a closed-loop sorption system  (see box 10.1). the most common application, however, is a  solar absorption cooling unit. the system requires  temperatures above 80°c, which means evacuated tube  collectors, advanced flat-plate collectors and compound  parabolic concentrators. the solar field required for a cooling  unit is about 4 m2 per kW of cooling capacity.  box 10.1 | sorption cooling units  a thermo-chemical refrigerant cycle (sorption) provides cold  by either absorption or adsorption cooling. absorption occurs  when a gaseous or liquid substance is taken up by another  substance, such as the solution of a gas in a liquid.  adsorption takes place when a liquid or gaseous substance is  bound to the surface of a solid material.  the absorption cooling circle can be described as follows: a  liquid refrigerant with a very low boiling point is vaporized at low  pressure, withdrawing heat from its environment and therefore  providing the desired cooling. the gaseous refrigerant is then  absorbed by a liquid solvent, mostly water. the refrigerant and  solvent are separated again by adding (renewable) heat to the  system, making use of the different boiling points. the gaseous  refrigerant is now condensed, released and returned to the  beginning of the process. the heat needed in the process can  be provided by firing natural gas, combined heat and power  plants, solar thermal collectors, etc.  10.6.2 geothermal, hydrothermal and aero-thermal  energy  the three categories of environmental heat are geothermal,  hydrothermal and aero-thermal energy. Geothermal energy is  the energy stored in the earth’s crust, i.e. in rock and  subsurface fluids. the main source of geothermal energy is  the internal heat flow from the earth’s mantle and core into  the crust, which itself is replenished mainly by heat from the  decay of radioactive isotopes. at depths of a few meters, the  soil is also warmed by the atmosphere. Geothermal energy is  available all year round, 24 hours a day, and is independent  of climatic conditions. hydrothermal energy is the energy  stored in surface waters - rivers, lakes, and the sea.  hydrothermal energy is available permanently at temperature  level similar to that of shallow geothermal energy. aerothermal  energy is the thermal energy stored in the earth’s  atmosphere, which originally comes from the sun, but has  been buffered by the atmosphere. aero-thermal energy is  available uninterruptedly, albeit with variations in energy  content due to climatic and regional differences.  deep geothermal energy (geothermal reservoirs)  on average, the crust’s temperature increases by 25-30°c  per km, reaching around 100°c at 3 km depth in most  regions of the world. high temperature fields with that reach  over 180°c can be found at this depth in areas with volcanic  activity. “deep geothermal reservoirs” generally refer to  geothermal reservoirs more than 400m deep, where reservoir  temperatures typically exceed 50°c. depending on reservoir  temperature, deep geothermal energy is used to generate  electricity and/or to supply hot water for various thermal  applications, such as for district heat, balneology, etc.  temperatures in geothermal reservoirs less that 400m deep  are typically below 30°c, which is too low for most direct use  applications or electricity production. in these shallow fields,  heat pumps are applied to increase the temperature level of  the heat extracted from shallow geothermal reservoirs.  the use of geothermal energy for heating purposes or for the  generation of electricity depends on the availability of steam  or hot water as a heat transfer medium. in hydrothermal  systems, hot water or water vapor can be tapped directly  from the reservoir. technologies to exploit hydrothermal  systems are already well established and are in operation in  many parts of the world. however, there is limited availability  of aquifers with sufficient temperature and water production  rate at favorable depths. in europe, high temperature (above  180°c) hydrothermal reservoirs, generally containing steam,  are found in iceland and italy.  hydrothermal systems with aquifer lowers temperatures  (below 180°c) can also be used to produce electricity and  heat in other regions. they contain warm water or a watersteam  mixture. in contrast to hydrothermal systems, eGs  systems do not require a hot aquifer; the heat carrier is the  rock itself. they can thus virtually found everywhere. the  natural permeability of these reservoirs generally does not  allow a sufficient water flow from the injection to the  production well, so energy projects require the artificial  injection of water into the reservoir, which they do by  fracturing rock underground. Water is injected from the  surface into the reservoir, where the surrounding rock acts as  a heat exchanger. the heated water is pumped back to the  surface to supply a power plant or a heating network. While  enhanced geothermal systems promise large potentials both  for electricity generation and direct use, they are still in the  pre-commercialization phase.  direct use of geothermal energy  (deep) geothermal heat from aquifers and deep reservoirs  can be used directly in hydrothermal heating plants to supply  heat demand nearby or in a district heating network.  networks provide space heat, hot water in households and  health facilities or low temperature process heat (industry,  agriculture and services). in the surface unit, hot water from  the production well is either directly fed into a heat  distribution network (“open loop system”), or heat is    transferred from the geothermal fluid to a secondary heat  distribution network via heat exchangers (“closed loop  system”). heating network temperatures are typically in the  range 60-100°c. however, higher temperatures are possible  if wet or dry steam reservoirs are exploited or if heat pumps  are switched into the heat distribution circuit. in these cases,  geothermal energy may also supply process heat applications  requiring temperatures above 100°c.  direct use provides heating and cooling for buildings  including district heating, fish ponds, greenhouses, bathing,  wellness and swimming pools, water  purification/desalination, and industrial and process heat for  agricultural products and mineral extraction and drying  (ipcc-srren 2012).62  for space heating, two basic types of systems are used: open  and closed loops. open loop (single pipe) systems directly  utilize the geothermal water extracted from a well to circulate  through radiators (figure 10.31, top). closed loop (double  pipe) systems use heat exchangers to transfer heat from the  geothermal water to a closed loop that circulates heated  freshwater through the radiators (figure 10.31; bottom).  alternatively, deep borehole heat exchangers can exploit the  relatively high temperature at depths between 300 and  3,000 m (20 – 110°c). heat pumps can be used to increase  the temperature of the useful heat, if required. the overall  efficiency of geothermal heat use can be raised if several  thermal direct-use applications with successive lower  temperature levels are connected in series (cascades). for  example, dry steam at 250°c can be fed to a cogeneration  plant for electricity, the co-generated heat then fed into a  district heating network at 80°c, and the waste heat at 40°c  used to warm fishing ponds. the main costs for deep geothermal  projects are in drilling.  simultaneous production of electricity and heat  in many cases, geothermal power plants also produce heat to  supply a district heating network. there are two different  options for using heat: one where the geothermal fluid is  separated into two streams separately used either for power  production or to feed the heat network; or a heat exchanger  transfers thermal energy from the geothermal fluid to the  working fluid, which feeds the turbines. after the heat exchange  process, the leftover heat from the geothermal fluid can be used  for heating purposes. in both cases, after the electricity  production in the turbines waste heat is not captured as it is for  cogeneration (chp), but released into the environment.  source ipcc 2012: special report on renewable energy sources and climate change mitigation. prepared by Working Group iii of the intergovernmental panel on climate change, cambridge university press.    a heat pump is a device that transfers heat from one fluid at  a lower temperature to another at a higher temperature.  thus, it allows heat to be carried from a lower to a higher  temperature level. the function of the heat pump may  therefore be compared to that of a water pump positioned  between two water basins connected to each other but  located at different altitudes: water will naturally flow from the  higher to the lower basin. it is, however, possible to return  water to the higher basin by using a pump, which draws  water from the lower one.  a heat pump consists of a closed circuit through which a  special fluid (refrigerant) flows. this fluid takes on a liquid or  gaseous state according to temperature and pressure  conditions. the condenser and the evaporator consist of heat  exchangers, i.e. special tubes placed in contact with service  fluids (such as air) in which the refrigerant flows. the latter  transfer heat to the condenser (the high temperature side)  and takes it away from the evaporator (the low temperature  side). electric power is required to operate heat pumps,  making them an efficient way of electric heating.  heat pumps have become increasingly important in buildings but  can also be used for industrial process heat. industrial heat  pumps (ihps) offer various opportunities to all types of  manufacturing processes and operations and use waste process  heat as the heat source, deliver heat at higher temperature for  use in industrial processes, heating or preheating, or for space  heating and cooling in industry. the introduction of heat pumps  with operating temperature below 100 °c are state of the art  technologies while higher temperature applications still require  additional r&d activities.54  heat pumps use the refrigeration cycle to provide heating,  cooling and sanitary hot water. they employ renewable energy  from ground, water and air to move heat from a relatively low  temperature reservoir (the “source”) to the temperature level of  the desired thermal application (the “output”). heat pumps  commonly use two types of refrigeration cycles:  • compression heat pumps use mechanical energy, most  commonly electric motors or combustion engines to drive  the compressor in the unit. consequently, electricity, gas or  oil is used as auxiliary energy.  • thermally driven heat pumps use thermal energy to drive  the sorption process - either adsorption or absorption - to  make ambient heat useful. different energy sources can be  used as auxiliary energy: waste energy, biomass, solar  thermal energy or conventional fuels.  compression heat pumps are most commonly used today;  however, thermally driven units are seen as a promising future  technology. the “efficiency” of a heat pump is described by  the coefficient of power (cop) - the ratio between the annual  useful heat output and the annual auxiliary energy  consumption of the unit. in the residential market, heat  pumps work best for relatively warm heat sources and lowtemperature  applications such as space heating and sanitary  hot water. they are less efficient for providing higher  temperature heat and can’t be used for heat over 90°c. for  industrial applications, different refrigerants can be used to  provide heat from 80°c to 90°c efficiently, so they are only  suitable for part of the energy requirements of industry.  heat pumps are generally distinguished by the heat source  they exploit:  • Ground source heat pumps use the energy stored in the  ground at depths from around hundred meters up to the  surface. they are used for deep borehole heat exchangers  (300 – 3,000m), shallow borehole heat exchangers (50-  250m) and horizontal borehole heat exchangers (a few  meters deep).  • Water source heat pumps are coupled to a (relatively warm)  water reservoir of around 10°c, such as wells, ponds,  rivers, and the sea.  • aero-thermal heat pumps use the outside air as heat  source. as outside temperatures during the heating period  are generally lower than soil and water temperature, ground  source and water source heat pumps typically more  efficient than aero-thermal heat pumps.  heat pumps require additional energy apart from the  environmental heat extracted from the heat source, so the  environmental benefit of heat pumps depends on both their  efficiency and the emissions related to the production of the  working energy. Where the heat pump has low cop and a  high share of electricity from coal power plants, for example,  carbon dioxide emissions relative to useful heat production  might be higher than conventional gas condensing boilers. on  the other hand, efficient heat pumps powered with “green”  electricity are 100% emission-free solutions that contribute  significantly to the reduction of greenhouse gas emissions  when used in place of fossil-fuel fired heating systems.  box 10.2 | typical heat pump specifications  usually provide hot water or space heat at lower  temperatures, around 35°c.  example uses: underfloor/wall heating.  typical size for space heating a single family house  purposes: approx. 5-10 kW thermal  typical size for space heating a large office building: >100  kW thermal.  aero-thermal heat pumps do not require drilling, which  significantly reduces system costs compared to other types.  if waste heat from fossil fuel fired processes is used as heat  source for this technology, the heat provided cannot be  classified as “renewable” - it becomes merely an efficient way  of making better use of energy otherwise wasted.    heat pumps for cooling  reversible heat pumps can be operated both in heating and in  cooling mode. When running in cooling mode in summer, heat  is extracted from the building and “pumped” into the  underground reservoir, which is then heated. in this way, the  temperature of the warm reservoir in the ground is restored  after its exploitation in winter.  alternatively, renewable cooling could be provided by  circulating a cooling fluid through the relatively cool ground  before being distributed in a building’s heating/cooling system  (“free cooling”). however, this cooling fluid must not be based  on chemicals that are damaging to the upper atmosphere,  such as hfcs (a strong greenhouse gas) or cfcs (ozonedepleting  gas).  in principle, high enthalpy geothermal heat might provide the  energy needed to drive an absorption chiller. however, only a  very limited number of geothermal absorption chillers are in  operation world-wide.  box 10.3 | district heat networks  heat networks are preferably used in populated areas such as  large cities. their advantages include a reduction of local  emissions, higher efficiency (in particular with cogeneration),  and less need for infrastructures that go along with individual  heating solutions. Generally heat from all sources can be used  in heat networks. however, some applications like cogeneration  technologies have a special need for a secure heat demand  provided by heat networks to be able to operate economically.  managing the variations in heat supply and demand is vital for  high shares of renewables, which is more challenging for space  heat and hot water than for electricity. heat networks help even  out peaks in demand by connecting a large number of clients,  and supply can be adjusted by tapping various renewable  sources and relatively cheap storage options. the use of an  existing heat network for renewable heat depends on the  competitiveness of the new heat applications or plants. the  development of new networks, however, is not an easy task.  the factors to assess whether a new heat network is  economically competitive compared to other heating and  cooling options are:  • heat density (heat demand per area) of building  infrastructure, depending on housing density and the  specific heat demand of the buildings  • obligation to connect to the network (leads to higher  effective heat density)  • existing building infrastructure and newly developed areas,  where network installation can be integrated in building site  preparation  • existence of competing infrastructures such as gas networks  • size of the heat network and distance to the remotest client  figure 10.32 | examples for heat pump systems. left: air source heat pump, middle: ground source heat pump with horizontal  collector, right: water source heat pump (open loop system with two wells)  source German heat pump association (bWp).  10.6.4 biomass heating technologies  there is a broad portfolio of technologies for heat production  available from biomass, a traditional fuel source. a need for  more sustainable energy supply has led to the development  of modern biomass technologies. a high variety of new or  modernised technologies and technology combinations can  serve space and hot water needs and eventually also provide  process heat even for industrial processes.  biomass can provide a large temperature range of heat and  can be transported over long distances, which is an  advantage compared to solar thermal or geothermal heat.  however, sustainable biomass imposes limits on volume and  transport distance. another drawback of bioenergy is exhaust  emissions and the risk of greenhouse gas emissions from  energy crop cultivation.  these facts lead to two approaches to biomass development:  • towards improved, relatively small-scale, decentralized  systems for space heat and hot water.  • development of various highly efficient and upgraded biomass  cogeneration systems for industry and district heating.  small applications for space heat and hot water in buildings  in the residential sector, traditional biomass applications have  been strongly improved over the last decades for efficient and  comfortable space heating and hot water supply. the standard  application is direct combustion of solid biomass (wood), for  example in familiar but improved firewood stoves for single  rooms. for average single homes and small apartment houses,  firewood and pellet boilers are an option to provide space heat  and hot water. Wood is easy to handle, and standardized  quality and pellet systems can be automated along the whole  chain; refuelling can then be reduced to a few times a year.  automatically fed systems are more easily adaptable to  variations in heat demand, such as between summer and  winter. another advantage is lower emissions of air pollutants  from pellet appliances compared to firewood.64 pellet heating  systems are gaining importance in europe.  handfed systems are common for smaller applications below  50 kW. small applications for single rooms (around 5kW  capacity) are usually handfed wood stoves with rather low  efficiency and low cost. technologies are available for central  heating in single and semi-detached houses and are also an  option for apartment complexes. Wood boilers provide better  combustion with operating efficiencies of 70-85% and fewer  emissions than stoves with a typical sizes of 10-50 kW.65,66,67  larger wood boilers can heat large buildings such as apartment  blocks, office buildings and other large buildings in service,  commerce and industry with space heat and hot water.  direct heating technologies  large applications for district or process heat rely on  automatic feeding technologies, due to constant heat  demand at a defined temperature. direct combustion of  biomass can provide temperatures up to 1,000°c, with higher  temperatures from wood and lower temperatures from straw,  for instance. automatically fed systems are available for wood  chips, pellets, and straw. three combustion types are:68  cogeneration technologies  cogeneration increases the efficiency of using biomass, if the  provided heat can be used efficiently. the size of a plant is  limited due to the lower energy content of biomass compared  to fossil fuels and resulting difficulties in fuel logistics. selection  of the appropriate cogeneration technology depends on the  available biomass. in several scandinavian countries – with an  extraordinarily high potential of forest biomass - solid biomass  is already a main fuel for cogeneration processes. finland gets  more than 30% and sweden even 70% of its co-generated  electricity from biomass.69  direct combustion technologies  the cogeneration processes can be based on direct  combustion types (fixed bed combustion, fluidised bed  combustion, pulverised fuel combustion). While steam  engines are available from 50 kW electric steam turbines  normally cover the range above 2 mWel, with special  applications available from 0.5 mW electric. the heat is  typically generated at 60- 70% efficiency depending on the  efficiency of the power production process, which in total can  add up to 90%.70 thus, small and medium cogeneration plants  provide three to five times more heat than power, with local  heat demand often being the limiting factor for the plant size.  upgraded biomass  there are various conversion technologies available to upgrade  biomass products for the use in specific applications and for  higher temperatures. common currently available technologies  are (upgraded) biogas production and gasification. other  technologies such as pyrolysis and the production of synthetic  gases and oils are under development.  Gasification is especially valuable in the case of biomass with  low caloric value and when it includes moisture. partial  oxidation of the biomass fuel provides a combustible gas  mixture mainly consisting of carbon monoxide (co).  Gasification can provide higher efficiency along the whole  biomass chain, but at the expense of additional investments  in this more sophisticated technology. there are many  different gasification systems based on varying fuel input,  gasification technology and combination with gas turbines.  the literature shows a large cost range for gasification  cogeneration plants. assumptions on costs of the gasification  processes vary strongly.    10  other upgrading processes are biogas upgrading for exports of  natural gas network and the production of liquid biomass, such  as plant oil, ethanol or second generation fuels. those  technologies can be easily exchangeable with fossil fuels, but  the low efficiency of the overall process and energy input needed  to produce energy crops are disadvantages for sustainability.  10.6.5 biogas  biogas plants use anaerobic digestion of bacteria for the  conversion of various biomass substrates into biogas. this  gas mainly consists of methane (a gas of high caloric value),  co2, and water. anaerobic digestion can be used to upgrade  organic matter with low energy density, such as organic  waste and manure. these substrates usually contain large  water contents and appear liquid. “dry” substrates need  additional water.  liquid residues like wastes and excrements are energetically  unused. biogas taps into their calorific potential. the residue  of the digestion process is used as a fertilizer, which has  higher availability of nitrogen and is more valuable than the  input substrates.71  methane is a strong greenhouse gas, so biogas plants need  airtight covers for the digestate to maintain low emissions.72  residues and wastes are preferable for biogas compared  with energy crops such as corn silage, which require energy  and fertilizer inputs while growing and thus create  greenhouse gas emissions.  biogas plants usually consist of a digester for biogas  production and a cogeneration plant. plants vary in size and  are normally fed by a mixture of substrates for example  manure mixed with maize silage, grass silage, other energy  crops and/or organic waste.73  normally biogas is normally used in cogeneration. in Germany,  the feed-in tariff means biogas production currently is mostly  for power. the majority of biogas plants are on farms in rural  areas. small biogas plants often use the produced heat for  local space heating and process heat, such as for drying  processes. larger biogas plants need access to a heat  network to make good use of all the available heat. however,  network access is often not available in rural areas, so there is  still untapped potential of heat consumption from biogas.  monitoring of German biogas plants showed that 50% of  available heat was actually wasted.74 the conditioning and  enriching of biogas and subsequent export to the gas network  has been promoted lately and should become an option to use  biogas directly at the location of heat demand.  upgrading technologies for biomass do bear the risk  of additional methane emissions, so tight emission standards  are necessary to achieve real reductions in greenhouse  gas emissions.75  greenpeace has a very strict policy in order to use only  sustainable bioenergy in future energy systems.  guidelines for the future use of bioenergy are  documented in chapter 8  10.6.6 storage technologies  as the share of electricity provided by renewable sources  increases around the world the technologies and policies  required to handle their variability is also advancing. along with  the grid-related and forecasting solutions discussed in chapter  3, energy storage is a key part of the energy [r]evolution.  once the share of electricity from variable renewable sources  exceeds 30-35%, energy storage is necessary in order to  compensate for generation shortages or to store possible  surplus electricity generated during windy and sunny periods.  today storage technology is available for different stages of  development, scales of projects, and for meeting both shortand  long-term energy storage needs. short-term storage  technologies can compensate for output fluctuations that last  only a few hours, whereas longer term or seasonal storage  technologies can bridge the gap over several weeks.  short-term options include batteries, flywheels, compressed  air power plants and pump storage power stations with high  efficiency factors. the later is also used for long term storage.  perhaps the most promising of these options is electric  vehicles (evs) with vehicle-to-Grid (v2G) capability, which can  increase flexibility of the power system by charging when  there is surplus renewable generation and discharging while  parked to take up peaking capacity or ancillary services to the  power system. vehicles are often parked close to main load  centres during peak times (e.g., outside factories) so there  would be no network issues. however battery costs are  currently very high and significant logistical challenges remain.  seasonal storage technologies include hydro pumped  storage and the production of hydrogen or renewable  methane. While the latter two options are currently in the  development with several demonstration projects mainly in  Germany, pumped storage has been in use around the world  for more than a century.  pumped storage  pumped storage is the largest-capacity form of grid energy  storage now available and currently the most important  technology to manage high shares of wind and solar electricity.  it is a type of hydroelectric power generation that stores energy  by pumping water from a lower elevation reservoir to a higher  elevation during times of low-cost, off-peak electricity and  releasing it through turbines during high demand periods.  While pumped storage is currently the most cost-effective  means of storing large amounts of electrical energy on an  operating basis, capital costs and appropriate geography are  critical decision factors in building new infrastructure. losses  associated with the pumping and water storage process make  such plants net consumers of energy; accounting for  evaporation and conversion losses, approximately 70-85% of  the electrical energy used to pump water into the elevated  reservoir can be recaptured when it is released.  renewable methane  both gas plants and cogeneration units can be converted to  operate on renewable methane, which can be made from  renewable electricity and used to effectively store energy  from the sun and wind. renewable methane can be stored  and transported via existing natural gas infrastructure, and  can supply electricity when needed. Gas storage capacities  can close electricity supply gaps of up to two months, and  the smart link between power grid and gas network can allow  for grid stabilisation. expanding local heat networks, in  connection with power grids or gas networks, would enable  the electricity stored as methane to be used in cogeneration  units with high overall efficiency factors, providing both heat  and power.76 there are currently several pilot projects in  Germany in the range of one to two- megawatt size, but not  in a larger commercial scale yet. if those pilot projects are  successful, a commercial scale can be expected between  2015 and 2020. however, policy support, to encourage the  commercialisation of storage is still lacking.    figure 10.33 | overview storage capacity of  different energy storage systems  source fraunhofer institut, 2010.  figure 10.34 | renewable (power) (to) methane -  renewable gas storing renewable power as renewable as  natural gas by linking electricity and natural gas networks  battery storage  there are numerous battery technologies on the market and  the increasing demand for electric vehicles triggered the  battery development significantly of the past decade. the  latest announcement of the us american company tesla to  build up a large scale battery manufaction plant will most  likely result in increased competition among the battery  industry and reduced prices.  especially lithium batteries are currently under discussion and  a new generation of large scale lithium-metal and lithiumion-  batteries (lib) as well as small scale application such as  tesla’s “powerWall” will increasingly complement renewable  power generation. besides that, mobile energy storage  devices form the basis not only for future oriented drive  systems such as vehicles with hybrid drive and all electrically  driven vehicles but also hydrogen storage and fuel cell  technologies. battery systems like lithium-sulfur and lithiumair  have a great potential to reach the highest capacity and  energy density values (dlr-Wagner).77 in order to increase  battery safety, reliability and to reduce costs partly through  economies of scale, battery research and development  activities have significantly expanded worldwide. many  energy experts see new battery technology in combination  with low cost solar photovoltaic power generation as a  potential disruptive technology which can change future  energy markets dramatically.  storage technologies – the cascade approach  there is no “one-size-fits-all” technology for storage. along  the entire supply and demand chain, different storage  technologies are required to cover the exact needs in regard  to storage time – from second reserve for frequency stability  to seasonal storage of several months. a cascade of different  storage technologies is required to support the local  integration of power generation from variable renewable  energy (vre) in distribution networks, support the grid  infrastructure to balance vre power generation, and support  self-generation and self-consumption of vre by customers.  figure 30 shows a whole range of storage technologies.  269    e n e r gy e f f i c i e n cy – m o r e w i t h l e s s  image the dark squares that make up the checkerboard pattern in this image are fields of a sort—fields of seaweed. along the south coast of south korea, seaweed is often  grown on ropes, which are held near the surface with buoys. this technique ensures that the seaweed stays close enough to the surface to get enough light during high tide but  doesn’t scrape against the bottom during low tide.  methodology for the energy  demand projections  energy consumption  in the year 2012  reference demand scenario  efficiency measures and  potentials  efficiency pathways of the  energy [r]evolution  development of energy  intensities  smart use  of renewable  energy makes  economic sense”  “    using energy efficiently is cheaper than producing new  energy from scratch and often has many other benefits. an  efficient clothes washing machine or dishwasher, for  example, uses less power and saves water too. efficiency in  buildings doesn’t mean going without – it should provide a  higher level of comfort. for example, a well-insulated house  will feel warmer in the winter, cooler in the summer and be  healthier to live in. an efficient refrigerator is quieter, has no  frost inside or condensation outside, and will probably last  longer. efficient lighting offers more light where you need it.  efficiency is thus really better described as ‘more with less’.  there are very simple steps every to efficiency both at home  in business and industries, through updating or replacing  separate systems or appliances, that will save both money  and energy. but the biggest savings don’t come from  incremental steps but from rethinking the whole concept -  ‘the whole house’, ‘the whole car’ or even ‘the whole  transport system’. in this way, energy needs can often be cut  back by four to ten times.  in order to find out the global and regional energy efficiency  potential, the dutch institute ecofys developed energy  demand scenarios for the Greenpeace energy [r]evolution  analysis in 2008, which have been updated by the university  of utrecht for the 2012 scenario edition (Graus et al. 2012).1  for the 2015 edition, the German aerospace center (dlr)  further developed and specified the energy demand  pathways for the power, heating, industry, transport and  other sectors via energy intensity indicators for all regions.  these scenarios cover energy demand over the period 2012-  2050 for ten world regions. in contrast to a reference  scenario, based on the iea World energy outlook 2014 (iea  Weo 2014)2, a low energy demand scenario for energy  efficiency improvements has been defined taking into  account historic trends, estimated technical efficiency  potentials and regional differences. the efficiency scenario is  based on the best technical energy efficiency potentials  taking into account implementation constraints including  costs and other barriers. the resulting demand structures of  the updated energy [r]evolution scenarios are summarised  below. this chapter focuses on stationary sectors and  processes, information about efficiency measures,  technologies and demand scenarios for the transportation  sector can be found in chapter 12.  11.1 methodology for the energy demand  projections  11.1.1 step 1: definition of a reference demand  scenario  in order to estimate potentials for energy-efficiency  improvement in 2050 a detailed reference scenario is  required that projects the development of energy demand  when current trends continue. in the World energy outlook  2014 “current policies” scenario (iea Weo 2014) only  currently adopted energy and climate change policies are  implemented. technological change including efficiency  improvement is slow but substantial and mainly triggered by  increased energy prices. the reference scenario covers  energy demand development in the period 2012-2050 for ten  world regions and three sectors:  • transport  • industry  • other (also referred to as “buildings and agriculture”).  Within the industry and other sectors a distinction is made  between electricity demand and fuel and heat demand. heat  demand mainly consists of district heating from heat plants  and from combined heat and power plants. fuel and heat  demand is referred to as ‘fuel demand’ for in the figures that  follow. the energy demand scenarios focus only on energy-related  fuel, power and heat use. feedstock consumption in  industries is thus excluded from the analysis. total final  consumption data in Weo includes non-energy use. by  assuming that the share of non-energy use remains the same  as in the base year 2012, we determine the energy-related  fuel use beyond 2012.  11.1.2 step 2: development of low energy demand  scenarios  the low energy demand scenarios are based on literature  studies and new calculations. the scenarios take into  account:  • the implementation of best practice technologies and a  certain share of emerging technologies.  • no behavioral changes or loss in comfort levels.  • no structural changes in the economy, other than occurring  in the reference scenario.  • equipment and installations are replaced at the end of their  (economic) lifetime, so no early retirement.  the development pathways are based on the current  worldwide energy use per sector and subsector and the  development of energy intensities in recent years, according  to the Weo scenarios and under the assumption of technical  potentials according to (Graus et al. 2012). furthermore, the  low energy demand scenarios aim for a convergence of references    energy consumption pattern in the different world regions  consistent to the convergence of economic development  assumed in the scenarios. figure 11.1 shows a breakdown of  final energy demand in the world by the most important subsectors  in the base year 2012.  efficiency measures and potentials in the transport sector  were described by the dlr institute of vehicle concepts in  2012 and updated and expanded in 2014 in commission of  Greenpeace (dlr 2015).3 the results are used as a basis for  developing the energy [r]evolution scenarios and  documented in chapter 12.  11.2 energy consumption in the year 2012  the following figures provide a short overview on the energy  consumption pattern worldwide and per world regions in  2012 as provided by the iea energy balances of 2014.4  figure 11.1 shows the final energy consumption worldwide  distinguished by energy carriers and sub-sectors.  Worldwide, industry consumes about 33% of total final  energy demand on average in 2012 (excluding non-energy  use). the share in africa is lowest with 16%, the share in  china is highest with 52%. energy consumption in the  residential sector (included in other sectors) add up to 25%  of total final energy consumption worldwide.  figure 11.2 shows a breakdown of final energy demand by  sub sector in industry worldwide for the base year 2012.  the largest energy consuming sectors in industry are  chemical and petrochemical industry, iron and steel and nonmetallic  minerals. together the sectors consume about 45%  of industrial energy demand. since these three sectors are  relatively large we look at them in detail. also we look at  aluminium production in detail, which is in the category of  non-ferrous metals because the share of aluminium  production makes up more than 10% of total industrial  energy demand in 2012 (iea-Weo 2014). for all sectors, we  look at implementing best practice technologies, increased  recycling and increased material efficiency. Where possible,  the potentials are based on specific energy consumption data  in physical units (mj/tonne steel, mj/tonne aluminium etc.).  272    energy consumed in buildings and agriculture (summarized  as other sectors) represents 40% of global energy  consumption in 2012. in most regions, the share of  residential energy demand is larger than the share of  commercial and public services energy demand (except in  oecd asia oceania). since energy use in agriculture is  relatively small (globally less than 5% of total final energy  demand), we do not look at this sector in detail but assume  the same energy saving potentials as in residential and  commercial combined.  fuels and heat use represent the largest share of total final  energy use in this sector, see figure 11.4. the share ranges  from 51% for oecd north america to 95% for africa.  the residential sector has the largest end-use for fuels and  heat, see figure 11.5: its share ranges from 44% in oecd  asia oceania to 91% in africa.    While residential buildings use a bigger share of fuel and heat,  for electricity, the consumption is more evenly spread over  the subsector of “commerce and public services” and  residential. Globally, 48% of electricity is used in residential  buildings and 40% in commerce and public services (also  referred to as services). the use of electricity in the services  sector strongly depends on the region and ranges from 16%  in india to 55% in oecd asia oceania, see figure 11.6.  the breakdown of electricity use per type of appliance is  different per region. in the energy [r]evolution scenario, a  convergence is assumed for the different types of electricity  demand per region in 2050. based on data in the literature5,  the following breakdown of electricity use per type is used as  default if no specific regional information is available:  • space heating 10%  • hot water 10%  • lighting 20%  • ict and home entertainment (he) 12%  • other appliances 30%  • air conditioning 18%  the trend is moving in the wrong direction: energy demand  continues to grow for appliances, lighting, and a large array  of electrical and fossil fuel-powered equipment, despite  significant progress on labelling and mandatory minimum  energy performance standards (meps). market penetration of  major appliances has increased significantly in emerging  markets, and plug loads from electrical devices and network  usage continue to grow in all markets, resulting in energy  consumption growth of over 50% from 2000 to 2012 (iea  etp 2015).  11.3 reference demand scenario  figure 11.7 shows the reference scenario for final energy  demand for the world per sector derived from the iea Weo 2014.  Worldwide final energy demand is expected to grow by 65%,  from 327 exajoule (ej) in 2012 to more than 538 ej in 2050.  the electricity demand has the largest relative growth of  120% in industry and 130% in other sectors. fuel demand in  other sectors is expected to grow slowest from 92 ej in  2012 to 116 ej in 2050.    in the reference scenario, final energy demand in 2050 will  be largest in china (112 ej), followed by oecd north  america (82 ej) and india (61 ej). final energy demand in  oecd asia oceania, middle east and latin america will be  lowest (21 ej and 36 ej respectively).  figure 11.9 shows the development of final energy demand  per capita per region in the reference scenario.  there would still be large differences between regions for final  energy demand per capita in 2050 in the reference scenario.  energy demand per capita is expected to be highest in oecd  north america and eastern europe/eurasia (135 and 132  Gj/capita respectively), followed by oecd asia oceania and  middle east (104 and 103 Gj/capita respectively). final energy  demand in africa, india, other non-oecd asia, and latin america  is expected to be lowest, ranging from 19-58 Gj/capita.  figure 11.10 gives the reference scenario for final energy  demand in industries in the period 2012-2050.  as can be seen, the energy demand in chinese industries is  expected to be huge in 2050 and amount to 54 ej. the  energy demand in all other regions together is expected to be  133 ej, meaning that china accounts for 29% of worldwide  energy demand in industries in 2050.    source iea Weo 2014 / dlr calculations for reference case.  in the reference scenario, energy demand in buildings and  agriculture is forecast to grow considerably (see figure 11.11).  figure 11.11 shows that energy demand in buildings and  agriculture in 2050 is highest in oecd north america (33 ej),  followed by china (32 ej) and oecd europe (29 ej). oecd asia  oceania, latin america and middle east have the lowest energy  demand for buildings and agriculture, ranging from 9-11 Gj.  the share of fuel and electricity use by buildings and  agriculture in total energy demand in 2012 and 2050 are  shown in figure 11.12. india and africa have the highest  share of buildings and agriculture in total final energy demand  today. until 2050, a sharp decrease is expected in india.  Globally, it is expected that electricity use in this sector will be  bigger in 2050 than in 2012 (16% instead of 12%) and fuel  use will be smaller (22% instead of 28%).    11.4 efficiency measures and potentials  11.4.1 efficiency measures in industry  the overall technical efficiency potentials are estimated after  identifying the most significant energy-efficiency improvements.  in the reference scenario, some of these energy-efficiency  improvements have already been implemented (autonomous  and policy induced energy-efficiency improvement). this  baseline was complemented by a most efficient development  pathway assuming all known and characterized efficiency  measures in the industry sector as being implemented.  the benchmarking of the industry sector’s energy use can  provide valuable insights regarding energy efficiency  potentials. energy efficiency indicators (eeis) differ  significantly between countries and sectors as a result of  differences in resource availability, energy prices, plant size,  and the age of capital stock, local factors, capital costs,  awareness, opportunity costs and government policies.  international energy statistics, which are the basis of the eei  approach, are subject to uncertainties however.  international benchmark studies show large differences for  energy intensity on a country level for the iron and steel,  chemical and pulp and paper industry. large energy savings  potentials were found in the range of 20-30% on average. this  section documents a special survey about industry efficiency  potential commissioned by Greenpeace international in 2013  (uni utrecht 2013).6 unfortunately, there are only very few  publications about energy efficiency potentials for various  subsectors of the global industry. thus, consistent data is  sometimes up to 10 years old, and there is a need for more indepth  research. even the Global energy assessment report –  published in 2012 – refers to data from 2007 and 2005.  iron and steel  most sectors in manufacturing industry produce a range of  products, so it is generally not possible to apply a simple  indicator of energy efficiency in energy use per tonne of  product. instead, an aggregate indicator, the energy  efficiency index (eei) is used. a decrease of the eei means  that the energy use per unit of product was reduced.  figure 11.13 shows the development of the energy efficiency  index for the iron and steel industry for G8+5 countries. for all  countries together, the energy efficiency improvement  amounted to 9 % between 2000 and 2005 (1.8 per cent per  year). it is striking that in some countries (such as south africa),  energy efficiency deteriorated, which may be caused by the  strong increase in steel demand, leading companies to take  less efficient plants into operation again. also remarkable is the  strong progress in energy efficiency in china (7.4%/a) and india  (7.9%/a), most likely through the rapid expansion of production  capacity with relatively efficient technology (reeep, 2008).7  references    figure 11.13 indicates that iron and steel plants in japan are  most efficient, followed by plants in Germany. among the  included eu countries, the eeis for the uk and italy are  relatively high and imply high overall energy efficiency  improvement potentials in the range of 35-45% on average.  significant differences exist in energy efficiency and co2  emission intensity of steel production among countries and  production plants. these differences can, partly, be explained  by variations in the quality of the resources and the cost of  energy (iea, 2008a).8 low energy efficiencies in some  countries reflect traditionally very low energy prices and  decreasing production volumes. however, in many countries  production has increased in recent years and energy prices  have risen substantially, already resulting in energy efficiency  improvements (iea, 2008a). furthermore, factors such as  good housekeeping, process control and level of waste heat  recovery may also explain the differences in energy and co2  emission intensity.  chemicals  table 11.1 shows an energy efficiency index of chemical  industry on country level. note that the eei is inverted in  comparison to the eei for the iron and steel industry, here a  higher eei means higher energy efficiency. the eei implies a  global average energy savings potential in the chemical  industry of 18% by implementing best practice technology.  values range from 0.7 for the us to 0.94 for italy. Generally a  determining factor in the energy efficiency index is the age of  plants, where older plants are less efficient than newer plants.  however, retrofits can invalidate this rule of thumb. a global  analysis indicates that chemical plants built in the 1970s are  the least efficient. the 1950 – 60s production plants had a  significant amount of upgrading, especially after the 1973 oil  price crisis, and show relatively good performance (iea, 2007).  due to the high diversity in terms of products produced in the  chemical industry it is worthwhile to look into energy  efficiency indicators for different products; such as the  following example of energy efficiency potential for the  production of ammonia.  ammonia production  the specific energy use for ammonia production (including  feed stocks) for G8+5 is given in figure 11.14. G8 countries  for which data are available show a slow decline in specific  energy use in 2005 in comparison to 1995. the average  progress (weighted according to production volumes) is 15 %  over the period from 1995-2005 (1.7 % per year). also, in this  case progress in developing countries (brazil and india) is  much faster. the specific energy consumption in china is  highest and reveals a large efficiency improvement potential.    pulp and paper industry  table 11.2 shows an energy efficiency index (eei) for the pulp  and paper industry for a selection of countries. the eei is  based on best practice values for pulp and paper production  and actual energy use in countries for pulp and paper  production (both in Gj/ton). an eei of 1.4 means that energy  use of pulp and paper production is 40% above best  practice, so this implies a savings potential by implementing  best practice technology of 40% in comparison to current  energy use.  based on the eei in table 11.2 japan and south korea are  most efficient in terms of pulp and paper production, whereas  the us and canada have the lowest energy efficiency. over  the last decade, the south korean paper industry has  invested heavily in relatively efficient capacity expansion (iea,  2007).9 canada’s comparatively low energy efficiency, on the  other hand, may be attributed to a high level of energy use in  older newsprint mills. also cheap hydroelectric power and the  use of wood waste with low efficiency could explain the low  eei in canada (iea, 2007).  energy efficiency improvement potentials and barriers  the largest potential for energy efficiency improvement can  be found when replacing older plants by new capacity. the  long term potential is at least 20-30% (on average), based on  implementing Best Available Techniques (bat), and can  increase in the future by emerging technologies that become  available. in general, high energy efficiency improvement  rates in industry require timely retirement of old/less efficient  capacity. retrofitting a 30-year-old plant so it can last another  20 years is disadvantageous from an energy efficiency point  of view because the largest improvement potential is  available when building new capacity, where plants can be  completely redesigned.  many studies show negative costs for most energy efficiency  measures in industry, meaning that the payback time of  measures is below their lifetime. it should be noted though  that not all steps taken are necessarily profitable from a  company’s perspective although most measures payback  within their lifetime. investment criteria in terms of desired  payback times, restrictions to the height of up-front capital  costs and opportunity costs in the end determine the  attractiveness of measures. furthermore, companies can be  very hesitant to implement measures that might (temporarily)  reduce plant reliability. the most important barriers that can  prevent energy efficiency and emission reduction measures  from being implemented and inhibit investment in  technologies that are both energy efficient and economically  efficient include:  • capital goods have not yet been fully depreciated;  • the lack of access to capital for investments in energy  efficiency measures and emission reduction measures;  • investments in other projects within the company are  considered more important or more efficient.  literature provides ample empirical evidence for the  existence of such barriers in the industry sector.  11.4.2 efficiency measures in buildings  a summary of possible energy saving measures for each of  the three types of fuel/heat use is provided here.  space heating  Globally, buildings accounted for 32% (118.6 ej) of final  energy consumption in 2012 and 53% of global electricity  consumption (iea etp 2015).10 energy-efficiency  improvement for space heating is indicated by the energy  demand per m2 floor area per heating degree day (hdd).  heating degree day is the number of degrees that a day’s  average temperature is below 18o celsius. typical current  heating demand for dwellings in oecd countries is 70-120  kj/m2/hdd (based on iea, 2007), but those with better  efficiency consume below 32 kj/m2/hdd.11 the european    union, which has made the most progress compared to other  regions, requires member countries to include cost optimality  as a criterion when developing building codes. france, for  example, has enacted a building code that limits space  heating, water heating, cooling and lighting energy to 50  kWh/m2 or less (iea etp 2015).  an example of a household with low energy use is given in  figure 11.15.  technologies to reduce energy demand of new dwellings are :12  • triple-glazed windows with low-emittance coatings. these  windows reduce heat loss to 40% compared to windows with  one pane. the low-emittance coating prevents energy waves  in sunlight coming in and thereby reduces cooling need.  • insulation of roofs, walls, floors and basement. proper  insulation reduces heating and cooling demand by 50% in  comparison to average energy demand.  • passive solar energy. Good building design can make use  of solar energy design, through orientation of the building’s  site and windows. the term “passive” indicates that no  mechanical equipment is used, because solar gains are  brought in through windows and shading keeps the heat  out in summer.  • balanced ventilation with heat recovery. heated indoor air  passes to a heat recovery unit and is used to heat incoming  outdoor air.    for existing buildings, retrofits help reduce energy use.  important retrofit options are more efficient windows and  insulation, which can save 39% and 32% of space heating or  cooling demand, respectively, according to the international  energy agency (iea 2006). furthermore, the iea reports that  average energy consumption in current buildings in europe can  decrease overall by more than 50%. in 2015, the iea  reconfirmed that energy use by space heating, cooling and  lighting, which represents 38% of global buildings energy  consumption, could be reduced by more than half by ensuring  that building envelopes are energy efficient (iea etp 2015).  While the technologies are there, the political process is far too  slow to exploit these large cost effective efficiency potentials.  to improve the efficiency of existing heating systems, an  option is to install new thermostatic valves, which can save  15% of energy required for heating. on average, this option is  installed in an estimated 40% of systems in europe.13  effective air sealing can reduce heating and cooling energy by  20% to 30% and needs to be implemented as part of any  construction and renovation project. more effort is needed  globally to ensure that any building that will be heated or  cooled is properly sealed. When sealing is done correctly,  with controlled ventilation and advanced heat recovery, it can  improve indoor air quality (iea etp 2015).  besides reducing the demand for heating, another option is  to improve the conversion of efficiency of heat supply. a  number of options are available, such as high efficiency  boilers that can achieve efficiencies of 107%, based on lower  heating value. another option is the use of heat pumps.  hot water and cooking  energy savings options for hot water include pipe insulation  and high efficiency boilers. another option is heat recovery  units that capture the waste heat from water going down the  drain and use it to preheat cold water before it enters the  household water heater. a heat recovery system can recover  as much as 70% of this heat and recycle it back for  immediate use.14 furthermore, water-saving shower heads  and flow inhibitors can be implemented. the typical saving  rate (in terms of energy) for shower heads is 12.5% and 25%  for flow inhibitors.15 in developing regions, improved cook  stoves can be an important energy-efficiency option, which  consume less energy than conventional ones.16  electricity use  electricity savings options per application are discussed in  the following.  electricity for space heating and hot water  measures to reduce electricity use for space heating and hot  water are similar to measures for heating by fuels. changing  the building shell can reduce the need for heat, and the other  approach is to improve the conversion efficiency of heat  supply, for example with heat pumps to provide both cooling  and space and water heating, as discussed in chapter 10  (renewable heating and cooling technologies). typically,  heat pumps can produce from 2.5 to 4 times as much useful  heat as the amount of high-grade energy input, with  variations due to seasonal performance. the sales of heat  pumps in a number of major european markets experienced  strong growth in recent years. total annual sales in austria,  finland, france, Germany, italy, norway, sweden and  switzerland reached 636,000 in 2013, compared to 446,000  in 2005.17 data suggests that heat pumps may be beginning  to achieve a critical mass for space and water heating in a  number of european countries.  lighting  incandescent bulbs have been the most common lamps for a  more than 100 years but also the most inefficient type since  up to 95% of the electricity is lost as heat.18 incandescent  lamps have a relatively short life-span (average approximately  1,000 hours) but have a low initial cost and attractive light  colour. compact fluorescent light bulbs (cfls) are more  expensive than incandescent, but they use about a quarter of  the energy and last about 10 times longer.19 in recent years,  many policies have been implemented that reduce or ban the  use of incandescent light bulbs in various countries.  however, energy savings from lighting are not just a question  of using more efficient lamps but also involve other  approaches: reducing light absorption of luminaries (the  fixture in which the lamp is housed), optimizing lighting levels  (which commonly exceed values recommended by iea  (2006)), using automatic controls like movement and daylight  sensors, and retrofitting buildings to make better use of  daylight. buildings designed to optimize daylight can receive  up to 70% of their annual illumination needs from daylight,  while a typical building will only get 20 to 25%.  the light-emitting diode (led) is one of today’s most energy-efficient  and rapidly-developing lighting technologies. led is a  highly energy efficient lighting technology and has the potential  to fundamentally change the future of lighting. residential  leds use at least 75% less energy, and last 25 times longer  than incandescent lighting.20    ict and home entertainment equipment  information and communication technologies (ict) and home  entertainment consist of a growing number of appliances in  both residential and commercial buildings, such as  computers, (smart) phones, televisions, set-top boxes,  games consoles, printers, copiers and servers. ict and  consumer electronics account for about 15% of residential  electricity consumption now.21 Globally, a tripling is expected  for ict and consumer electronics from 776 tWh/a in 2010 to  1,700 tWh/a in 2030. one of the main options for reducing  energy use in ict and home entertainment is using best  available technology. iea (2009b) estimates that a reduction  is possible from 1,700 tWh/a to 775 tWh/a in 2030 by  applying best available technology and to 1,220 tWh/a by  least life-cycle costs measures, which do not impose  additional costs on consumers. below, we discuss other  energy savings options for ict and home entertainment.  other appliances  other appliances include cold appliances (freezers and  refrigerators), washing machines, dryers, dish washers,  ovens and other kitchen equipment. electricity use for cold  appliances depends on average per household storage  capacities, the ratio of frozen to fresh food storage capacity,  ambient temperatures and humidity, and food storage  temperatures and control (iea, 2003). european and  japanese households typically have one combined  refrigerator-freezer in the kitchen or they have a refrigerator  and a separate freezer. in oecd north america and australia,  where homes are larger, almost all households have a  refrigerator-freezer, and many also have a separate freezer  and occasionally a second refrigerator.22 it is estimated that  by improving the energy efficiency of cold appliances, on  average 45% of electricity use could be saved for eu-27.23  for “wet appliances,” an estimated potential of 40-60% could  be saved by implementing best practice technology.  air conditioning  there are several options for technological savings from air  conditioning equipment; one is using a different refrigerant.  tests with the refrigerant ikon b show possible energy  consumption reductions of 20-25% compared to refrigerants  commonly used.24  Geothermal cooling is another important option explained in  chapter 10. of several technical concepts available, the  highest energy savings can be achieved with two storage  reservoirs in aquifers where cold water is used from the cold  reservoir in summer. the hot reservoir can be used with a  heat pump for heating in winter.  solar energy can also be used for heating and cooling; the  different types are also discussed in chapter 10 renewable  heating and cooling. heat pumps and air conditioners that  can be powered by solar photovoltaic systems,25 for example,  use only 0.05 kW electric power instead of 0.35 kW for  regular air conditioning.26  in addition to efficient air conditioning equipment, it is as  important to reduce the need for air conditioning. insulation  can be used to prevent heat from entering the building along  with fewer inefficient appliances in the house (such as  incandescent lamps, old refrigerators, etc.) that give off heat,  cool exterior finishes (such as cool roof technology27 and  light-coloured paint on the walls) to reduce the peak cooling  demand as much as 10-15%28, better windows, vegetation to  reduce the amount of heat that comes into the house, and  ventilation instead of air conditioning units.    11.5 efficiency pathways of the energy  [r]evolution  11.5.1 low demand scenario for industry sector  figure 11.16 shows the resulting energy demand scenarios  for the sector industry on a global level. energy demand in  electricity can be reduced by 23% and nearly 60% for fuel  use, in comparison to the reference scenario in 2050. in  comparison to 2012, global fuel use in industry decreases  from 78 ej to 50 ej and electricity use shows an increase  from 29 ej to 48 ej which is also a result of the substitution  of fuel use for heating with electric heating systems.  figure 11.17 shows the final energy demand in the industrial  sector per region for total energy demand. large reductions are  assumed in all regions, especially in the developing countries.  11.5.2 low demand scenario for buildings and other  sectors  figure 11.18 shows the resulting energy demand scenarios  for the buildings and agriculture sector on a global level.  energy demand for electricity is reduced by 33% and for fuel  by 46%, in comparison to the reference scenario in 2050. in  comparison to 2012, global fuel use in this sector decreases  from 92 ej to 62 ej while electricity use shows a strong  increase from 38 ej to 58 ej.  energy    figure 11.19 shows the final energy demand in the buildings  and agriculture (= other sectors) per region for total final  energy demand. decreases in absolute terms are strongest in  the oecd regions while in most developing countries  population will further grow and the use of electronic and  other devices will further proliferate.  11.6 development of energy intensities  resulting specific energy consumption in transport,  industry and other sectors are shown in figure 11.20 to  figure 11.22 in terms of global averages and in figure 11.23  for each world region as total final energy demand of all  sectors. energy intensity in transport and industry  decreases significantly already in the reference scenario  while in the energy [r]evolution scenario an even stronger  decoupling of economic growth and energy consumption is  assumed. specific electricity demand in other sectors  increases only slightly from 5.6 to 6.1 Gj per capita (1,550  kWh/capita to 1,690 kWh/capita) while specific fuel demand  decreases strongly due to the implementation of ambitious  efficiency measures for heating in the energy [r]evolution.  the resulting energy intensities for different world regions  show a convergence until 2050 but still large differences  between developed and developing countries which are a  result of the economic and population growth assumptions,  assumed developments in the reference scenario according  to Weo 2014 and the assumption that available efficiency  potentials are implemented in all world regions. different  assumptions for economic growth and their consequences  for lifestyle are possible especially for africa, india and other  asia and may lead to significant higher demand pathways  and therefore higher infrastructural needs for a secure  energy supply. further research is needed here in order to  take into account different societal and economic pathways  and how these could affect energy demand in different  world regions. on the other side an even larger deployment  of potentials for renewable energies is possible in most  regions and can ensure that requirements for an additional  energy supply can be met.  284      t r a n s p o r t  image late spring and summer weather brings blooms of color to the atlantic ocean off of south america, at least from a satellite view. the patagonian shelf break is a  biologically rich patch of ocean where airborne dust from the land, iron-rich currents from the south, and upwelling currents from the depths provide a bounty of nutrients for  the grass of the sea—phytoplankton. in turn, those floating sunlight harvesters become food for some of the richest fisheries in the world.  the future of the transport  sector in the reference  scenario  technical and behavioural  measures to reduce transport  energy consumption  projection of the  future car market  conclusion  the transport  revolution  must start in  megacities.”  “  sustainable transport is needed to reduce the level of  greenhouse gases in the atmosphere, just as much as a shift  to renewable electricity and heat production. today, the  transport sector requires just over one fourth (27%) (iea Weo  sr 2015)1 of current energy use, including road and rail,  aviation and sea transport. by the end of 2013, 92.7% of all  transport energy demand was provided by oil products, 2.5%  from bio fuels and only 1% from electricity (iea Weo sr  2015). a transition from fossil fuels to renewable electricity –  either directly or via synthetic fuels – for the entire global  transport sector is required in order to phase-out carbon  emissions. this is one of the most difficult parts of the energy  [r]evolution and requires a true technical revolution. it is  ambitious but nevertheless possible with currently available  technologies for land-based and other transport.  14% of all fossil transport fuels are used for “bunker fuel,”  meaning transport energy for international shipping and  international air transport. in order to replace bunker fuels  entirely with renewables, a combination of energy efficiency  and renewable fuels is required. both the marine and aviation  sector can start this transition, but we need more research  and development along the way towards a truly 100%  renewable system. biofuels and synthetic hydrocarbons  (synfuels) – produced with renewable electricity – are the only  realistic renewable energy option for planes currently and for  the next decade. for ships, new wind-based drives, such as  new generation sails and flettner rotors, are needed to  replace a proportion of engine fuels.  the transport [r]evolution however must start in (mega)cities  where a modular shift from individual to efficient and  convenient public transport systems powered by renewable  electricity is possible in a short time frame and with currently  available technologies. political action is the main barrier in  changing land-based transport systems.  in order to assess the present status and potential  technological pathways of global transport, including its  carbon footprint, a special study about technical efficiency  potentials and the effect of modular shifts in the transport  sector was undertaken for the 2012 energy [r]evolution  report by the German aerospace center’s (dlr) institute of  vehicle concepts (dlr 2012)2 analyzing the entire global  transport sector based on the ten iea world regions. the  institute carried out new technical research for Greenpeace in  early 2015, focusing on the latest developments of landbased  transport systems, especially for megacities (dlr  2015).3 the resulting key parameters of this study are shown  in table 12.7.  the demand projections for both energy [r]evolution  scenarios are based on the afore-mentioned research work.  the scenario base year has been updated using the 2014 iea  energy balances. the projections of the transport sector in  the reference scenario are based on iea Weo 2014.  assumed parameters for person and freight kilometres,  occupancy rates and vehicle market development have not  been re-calculated but adapted to the new base year 2012 as  opposed to 2009 in the previous report.  the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario starts with the  same technical and modal shift pathways but introduces  them more quickly and to a larger extent. in addition, the  advanced scenario replaces almost the entire remaining fossil  fuel demand with synfuels, hydrogen and renewable methane  produced from renewables from 2035 onwards. thus, the  electricity demand in the advanced energy [r]evolution is  significantly higher.  this chapter provides an overview of selected measures  appropriate to develop a more energy efficient and  sustainable transport system in the future, with a focus on:  • reducing transport demand,  • shifting transport ‘modes’ (from high to low energy  intensity), and  • improving energy efficiency from technology development.  the section provides plausible transport energy demand  calculations including projections for the passenger vehicle  market (light duty vehicles) used as background knowledge  for the updated energy [r]evolution transport pathways.  overall, some technologies will have to be adapted for  greater energy efficiency. in other situations, a simple  modification will not be enough. the transport of people in  megacities and urban areas will have to be reorganised  almost entirely and individual transport must be  complemented or even substituted by public transport  systems. car sharing and public transport on demand are  only the beginning of the transition needed for a system that  carries more people more quickly and conveniently to their  destination while using less energy.    12.1 the future of the transport sector in the  reference scenario  as for electricity projections, a detailed reference scenario is  required for transport. the scenario constructed includes  detailed market shares and energy intensity data per mode of  transport and per region up to 2050 (sources: Wbscd, eu  studies). based on the reference scenario, deviating  transport performance and technical parameters are applied  to create both energy[r]evolution scenarios for reducing  energy consumption. traffic performance is assumed to  decline for the high energy intensity modes and further  energy reduction potentials were assumed from further  efficiency gains, alternative power trains and fuels. the  advanced energy [r]evolution introduces electric mobility  faster and replaces all remaining fossil fuels between 2040  and 2050 with renewable synfuels, especially in the marine  and aviation transport sectors.  the total transport energy demand is made up of light duty  vehicles (ldvs), heavy and medium duty freight trucks, rail,  air, and national marine transport (inland navigation).  although energy use from international marine bunkers  (international shipping fuel suppliers) is not included in these  calculations, it is still estimated to account for 14% of today’s  worldwide transport final energy demand and around 15% by  2050 in the reference scenario. a un report concluded that  carbon dioxide emissions from shipping are much greater  than initially thought and increasing at an alarming rate  (eyring et al 2005).4 it is therefore very important to improve  the energy efficiency of international shipping. possible  options are examined later in this chapter.  the definitions of the transport modes for the scenarios are:  (fulton 2004)5  • light duty vehicles (ldv) are four-wheel vehicles used  primarily for personal passenger road travel. these are  typically cars, sports utility vehicles (suvs), small  passenger vans (up to eight seats) and personal pickup  trucks. light duty vehicles are also simply called ‘cars’  within this chapter.  • heavy duty vehicles (hdv) are long-haul trucks operating  almost exclusively on diesel fuel. these trucks carry large  loads with lower energy intensity (energy use per tonne-kilometre  of haulage) than medium duty vehicles, such as  delivery trucks.  • medium duty vehicles (mdv) include medium-haul trucks  and delivery vehicles.  • aviation in each region denotes domestic air travel  (intraregional and international air travel is provided as  one figure).  • inland navigation denotes freight shipping with vessels  operating on rivers and canals or in coastal areas for  domestic transport purposes  figure 12.1 shows the breakdown of worldwide final energy  demand for the transport modes in 2012 and 2050 in the  reference scenario. the largest share of energy demand  comes from ldv (mainly for passenger road transport),  although it decreases from 71% in 2012 to 68% in 2050. the  share of domestic air transport increases from 4.6% to 5.1%.  of particular note is the high share of road transport in total  transport energy demand: 87% in 2012 and 82% in 2050.  overall energy demand in the transport sector adds up to 90  ej in 2012. it is projected in the reference scenario to  increase to 150 ej in 2050.    in the advanced energy [r]evolution scenario, implying the  implementation of all efficiency and behavioural measures  described, we calculated in fact a decrease of energy  demand to 70 ej, which means a lower annual energy  consumption than in 2012.  figure 12.2 shows world final energy use for the transport  sector per region in 2012 and 2050 in the reference  scenario. today, energy consumption is comprised by nearly  half of the total amount by oecd north america and oecd  europe. in 2050, the picture looks more fragmented. in  particular, china and india form a much bigger portion of the  world transport energy demand, whereas oecd north  america remains the largest energy consumer.  12.2 technical and behavioural measures to  reduce transport energy consumption  the following section first describes how the transport modes  contribute to total and relative energy demand. next,  selections of measures for reducing total and specific energy  transport consumption are put forward for each mode.  measures are grouped as either behavioural or technical.  the three ways to decrease energy demand in the transport  sector examined are:  • reduction of transport demand of high energy intensity  modes  • modal shift from high energy intensive transport to low  energy intensity modes  • energy efficiency improvements.  12.2.1 behavioural measures to reduce transport  energy demand  understanding people and behaviour is the key. sustainability  is about our lifestyle choices. it is about how people live their  daily lives and, as humans, how we base our decisions on our  surrounding environment. most people make decisions based  on what is convenient and inviting. the energy [r]evolution  transport pathways do not rely on the very few idealists who  always do ‘the right thing’. therefore, cities in particular have  to change so that making the ‘right choice’ will be also the  ‘easiest choice.’  energy  [r]evolution    greenpeace promotes sustainable mobility via three different  approaches:  1. avoid: avoid transport where it is not necessary by  embracing the ‘compact city’ model.  2. shift: encourage the use of more sustainable transport  (such as public transport, walking, cycling) and discourage  usage of private motorized transport.  3. improve: the least efficient modes of transport (such as  private cars) have to become as efficient as possible.  the point of departure for an urban mobility strategic  concept that promotes sustainable mobility is the quality of  the public realm, with its streets and spaces that stimulate  sustainable mobility choices to contribute to quality of life –  safe, economical, sustainable, inclusive (Greenpeace  Germany 2015):6  • reduction of car dependency  • sustainable transportation modes  • more efficient land use by density  • mixed-use development that form mixed-modal urban hubs  that are easily accessible destination points.  technical measures – urban electric mobility  currently, to achieve a locally emission-free land transport  option, electric motors are utilized as the main powertrain.  the electricity may be provided to the electric motor via  several means either on or off-board:  • battery electric powertrain: the electricity is generated offboard  and stored on-board via electro-chemical energy  storage units,  • catenary electric powertrain: the electricity is generated  off-board and constantly supplied to the vehicle via an  external catenary during driving,  • fuel cell electric powertrain: the electricity is generated onboard  with a fuel cell via reaction of hydrogen and oxygen  battery electric powertrain  a battery electric vehicle (bev) utilizes an electric motor to  convert electrical energy into mechanical energy and requires a  battery for the energy storage. the battery is connected to  electric motor via a dc/ac converter including a control system  (Grunditz, 2014).7 most of the bevs have a gearbox with only  one gear ratio (lienkamp, 2014).8 if the vehicle has only one  central electric motor, then a differential is needed similar to  those in conventional vehicles. the structure of a bev with a  central electric motor is presented schematically in figure 12.3.  the battery is considered to be one of the most critical  components of electrified vehicles due to its cost-intensive  nature. furthermore, batteries have lower energy density  resulting in limited driving ranges combined with high  volumes and masses of the energy storage system.  therefore, batteries (especially lithium-based ones) have  been subject to tremendous research efforts in recent years  and this trend is expected to continue in the following years  (Wagner, preschitschek et al., 2013)9 with improvements in  costs, life expectancy and energy density.    several quick battery charging strategies for battery electric  road and rail vehicles beyond common conductive cablebased  charging have emerged in recent years (some of which  have already entered commercialization):  • conductive quick charging: this strategy is mainly designed  for buses and trams. the charging at high power rates (200-  500 kW) is performed at intermediate and turning points via  extendable pantographs; a demonstration project for buses  is, for example, in day-to-day use in Geneva, switzerland  (sae off-highway engineering online, 2013).10  • inductive quick charging:  ◦ several research and demonstration projects on  inductive charging at traffic lights or even dynamically inroad-  charging exist for passenger cars (eGvi, 2014;  Wich, 2014).11  ◦ for buses at intermediate stops and 10-30 minutes recharging  at turning points, several research,  demonstration and commercialization projects are  underway operating with a charging power of 50-200 kW  (fta, 2014b).12  • battery swapping stations  ◦ china has used robotic battery swapping stations for its  urban battery electric buses in several cities since 2008  (li, 2013).13  ◦ battery car maker tesla has installed a commercial  battery swap station in california allowing a battery swap  in about 3 minutes (forbes, 2014).14  • both inductive charging at stations and battery swap  stations demand high infrastructural investments but  enable a reduction of on-board battery capacity, weight,  and hence vehicle cost (and allowing also an increase of  passenger load).  although battery-electric drivetrains could also be applied to  rail applications, only road battery electric vehicles are  considered in this study since external catenary systems are  best suited to rail-bound urban mass rapid transit systems.  the advantages of battery electric road vehicles compared to  conventional internal combustion engine vehicles are  summarized below:  • Zero local emissions  • significant lower well-to-wheel greenhouse gas emissions  possible (depending on the electricity generation)  • lower variable costs (mainly fuel)  • higher torque compared to internal combustion engine at  low speed  • lower vibrations and noise  however, battery electric road vehicles have also some  drawbacks compared to internal combustion engine vehicles,  which include: :  • limited driving range due to lower energy density  • longer charging time,  • additional infrastructure requirement for charging points  • higher purchase costs (at the moment)  catenary electric powertrain  public transport systems, such as trams (light rail trains),  metro, commuter train and trolley bus systems are operated  on rail or road networks equipped with electric overhead wires  or third rails alongside the track. the electric power is  continuously transferred to the vehicle via the wire or third rail,  usually direct current (dc) with 500 – 1500 v, and drawn by a  current collector installed on the vehicle. sometimes, also  alternate current (ac) systems with higher voltages are  applied in commuter rail systems. urban tram, metro and  usually also commuter rail systems draw the electricity from  an overhead catenary or a third rail. road trolley buses  operate with special current collectors under two overhead  wires; one is to draw the current from the wire and the other  to close the circuit. in recent years, overhead catenary trucks  for goods transport on roads have been in discussion (den  boer, aarnik et al., 2013)15, but no such system has begun to  enter commercial service in an urban environment up to now.  furthermore, overhead catenary trucks are not expected to be  in service in the megacities in the near future (about 5 years).  in general, overhead catenary systems can be distinguished  by transport application as presented in table 12.2.    vehicles drawing traction electricity continuously from a  catenary are advantageous over battery electric and fuel cell  vehicles in terms of the following aspects:  • the traction energy is continuously drawn from an external  current wire making expensive and heavy vehicle on-board  storage systems unnecessary,  • there is no need to refuel (as with fuel cell hydrogen  vehicles) or to recharge (as with battery electric vehicles)  and, thus, the operating range, within network borders, is  not limited,  • high vehicle efficiency levels (80-90 %),  • proven and well-known system on infrastructure and  vehicle level for decades,  • especially useful for highly frequented public transport  networks.  in certain cases, however, overhead electrification may not  prove advantageous over battery electric and fuel cell  vehicles. some drawbacks of catenary electrification include:  • visual intrusion through overhead wire network, undesired  especially in historically valuable city areas,  • high capital expenditure for wayside energy infrastructure  that may not pay off in case of low line-capacity utilization,  • vehicles are bound to the fixed catenary network,  • application restricted to public transport systems – the  system is not useable for passenger cars.  fuel cell electric powertrain  in contrary to the vehicle using batteries or overhead lines,  fuel cell- and hybrid electric vehicles provide traction power  by using a fuel cell as energy converter of chemical energy  (mostly hydrogen) into electrical energy based on ionic  catalytic breakdown of the molecular fuel at the anode. figure  11.4 illustrates an exemplary fuel cell powertrain with a  central electric motor. key elements of this system are the  hydrogen storage and fuel cell system.  there are several ways to store hydrogen on board, such as in  liquid form, compressed under high pressure, or via physical  and chemical compounds (eichlseder and klell, 2012).16 the  state of the art is compressed hydrogen storage under 350  and 700 bar using composite materials for the tanks, which  prevents hydrogen diffusion and ensures safety. the 700 bar  technology allows for a higher energy storage capacity than  350 bar storage. energy losses due to compression amounts  to approximately 15 % of the energy content of hydrogen,  significantly less than hydrogen stored in liquid form (30-40 %  losses) (ferrari, offinger et al., 2012).17  there are several fuel cell types. in cars, pem fuel cells are  used. the reactants here are hydrogen (h2) at the anode and  oxygen (o2) at the cathode. the only waste product of the  reaction is water.  although fuel cell electric vehicles (fcevs) could also be used  for rail applications, only road vehicles are considered in this  study. the advantages of fuel cell electric road vehicles are  summarized below:  292    • Zero local emissions  • possibly lower well-to-wheel greenhouse gas emissions  than internal combustion engine vehicles (depending on  how the hydrogen is produced)  • high efficiency of fuel cells compared to internal  combustion engine, particularly at low temperatures  • lower vibrations and noise than conventional vehicles  • higher range of operation than bevs  • significant shorter refueling times than recharging times for  bevs  however, fuel cell electric road vehicles have also some  drawbacks, which include:  • higher purchase costs (even higher than bevs)  • requirement to build a hydrogen infrastructure  • high purity requirements and high cost of hydrogen as fuel  • durability and long-term performance of fuel cell stack  especially for transient operation  step 1: reduction of transport demand  to use less transport overall means reducing the amount of  ‘passenger-km (p-km)’ travelled per capita and reducing  freight transport demand. the amount of freight transport is  to a large extent linked to Gdp development and therefore  difficult to influence. however, improved logistics – for  example, optimal load profiles for trucks and a shift to  regionally produced goods – can reduce transport demand.  passenger transport:  the study focussed on the change in passenger km per  capita of high-energy intensity air transport and personal  vehicles modes. passenger transport by light duty vehicles  (ldv), for example, is energy-demanding both in absolute  and relative terms. policy measures that enforce a reduction  of passenger km travelled by individual transport modes are  an effective means to reduce transport energy demand.  policy measures for reducing passenger transport demand in  general could include:  • charge and tax policies that increase transport costs for  individual transport  • price incentives for using public transport modes  • installation or upgrading of public transport systems  • incentives for working from home  • stimulating the use of video conferencing in business  • improved cycle paths in cities.  in the reference scenario, there is a forecast increase in  passenger-km in all regions up to 2050. for the 2050 energy  [r]evolution scenario, there is still a rise, but it would be  much flatter. for oecd europe and oecd north america  there will even be a decline in individual transport on a per  capita basis.  the reduction in passenger-km per capita in the advanced  energy [r]evolution scenario compared to the reference  scenario comes with a general reduction in car use due to  behavioural and traffic policy changes and partly with a shift  of transport to public modes.  a shift from energy-intensive individual transport to low-energy  demand public transport goes align with an increase  in low-energy public transport person-km.  freight transport:  it is difficult to estimate a reduction in freight transport.  neither energy [r]evolution scenario includes a model for  reduced volume for required freight transport, but it is  assumed that a modular shift from road to rail and/or to  battery or fuel cell power transport vehicles takes place.  step 2: changes in transport mode  determining which vehicles and transport modes are the  most efficient for each purpose requires an analysis of the  transport mode technologies. then, the energy use and  intensity of each type of transport is used to calculate energy  savings resulting from a transport mode shift. the following  information is required:  • passenger transport: energy demand per passenger  kilometer, measured in mj/p-km.  • freight transport: energy demand per kilometre of  transported tonne of goods, measured in mj/tonne-km.  for this study, passenger transport includes light duty  vehicles, passenger rail and air transport. freight transport  includes medium duty vehicles, heavy duty vehicles, inland  navigation, marine transport and freight rail. Wbcsd 2004  data was used in (dlr 2012) as baseline data and updated  where more recent information was available.  passenger transport:  travelling by rail is the most efficient – but car transport  improves strongly. figure 12.5 shows the worldwide average  specific energy consumption (energy intensity) by transport  mode in the base year and in the energy [r]evolution scenario  in 2050. this data differs for each region. there is a large  difference in specific energy consumption among the  transport modes. passenger transport by rail will consume  28% less energy in 2050 than car transport and 85% less  than aviation on a per p-km basis, so shifting from road to rail  can produce large energy savings.    18 accordinG to (dlr 2012) for the 2012 edition of enerGy [r]evolution – the advanced enerGy [r]evolution  introduces the same efficiency technoloGies faster.  from figure 12.5, we can conclude that passengers will need  to shift from cars and especially air transport to less energy-intensive  passenger rail transport in order to reduce transport  energy demand.  the energy [r]evolution scenario assumes that a certain  proportion of passenger-kilometer of domestic air traffic and  intraregional air traffic (i. e., traffic among two countries of  one iea region) is suitable to be substituted by high speed rail  (hsr). for international aviation, there is obviously no  substitution potential to other modes whatsoever.  table 12.3 displays the relative model shifts used in the  calculation for the energy [r]evolution scenarios. Where the  shares are higher, cities are closer to each other, so a  substitution by high speed trains is a more realistic option (i.  e. distances of up to 800 – 1,000 km, compared to countries  where they are far apart).  freight transport:  similar to figure 12.5, which showed average specific energy  consumption for passenger transport modes, figure 12.6  shows the respective energy consumption for various freight  transport modes in 2009 and in energy [r]evolution scenarios  2050, the values are weighted according to stock and traffic  performance.  energy intensity for all modes of transport is expected to  decrease by 2050. in absolute terms, road transport has the  largest efficiency gains whereas transport on rail and on  water remain the modes with the lowest relative energy  demand per tonne-km. rail freight transport will consume 80-  90% less energy per tonne-km in 2050 than long haul hdv.  this means that large energy savings can be made following  a shift from road to rail.    modal shifts for transporting goods in the energy [r]evolution  in the energy [r]evolution scenarios, as much road freight as  possible should be shifted from road freight transport to less  energy intensive freight rail to gain maximum energy savings  from modal shifts.  since the use of ships largely depends on geography, a  modal shift is not proposed for national ships but instead a  shift towards freight rail. as the goods transported by  medium duty vehicles are mainly going to regional  destinations (and are therefore not suitable for the long  distance nature of freight rail transport), no modal shift to rail  is assumed for this transport type.  for long-haul heavy duty vehicles transport, however,  especially low value density, heavy goods that are  transported on a long range are suitable for a modal shift to  railways (tavasszy 2011).19  step 3: technical efficiency improvements  energy efficiency improvements are the third important way of  reducing transport energy demand. this section explains  ways for improving energy efficiency up to 2050 for each type  of transport, namely:  • air transport  • passenger and freight trains  • trucks  • inland navigation and marine transport  • cars  in general, an integral part of an energy reduction scheme is  an increase in the load factor – both for freight and passenger  transport. as the load factor increases, fewer vehicles need  to be employed, so the energy intensity decreases when  measured per passenger-km or tonne-km.  in aviation, there are already sophisticated efforts to optimise  the load factor; however, for other modes such as road and  rail freight transport there is still room for improvement. for  freight transport, logistics and supply chain planning can  improve load factors, while enhanced capacity utilisation will  do so in passenger transport.  air transport  a study conducted by nasa (nasa 2011)20 shows that the  energy use of new subsonic aircrafts can be reduced by up  to 58% up to 2035. potentially, up to 81% reductions in co2  emissions are achievable when using biofuels. (akerman  2005)21 reports that a 65% reduction in fuel use is technically  feasible by 2050. technologies to reduce fuel consumption of  aircrafts mainly comprise:  • aerodynamic adaptations to reduce the drag of the aircraft,  for example by improved control of laminar flow, the use of  riblets and multi-functional structures, the reduction in  fasteners, flap fairings and the tail size as well as advanced  supercritical airfoil technologies.  • structural technologies to reduce the weight of the aircraft  while at the same time increasing stiffness. examples  include the use of new lightweight materials like advanced  metals, composites and ceramics, the use of improved  coatings, and the optimised design of multi-functional,  integrated structures.  • subsystem technologies, including advanced power  management and generation along with optimised flight  avionics and wiring.  • propulsion technologies like advanced gas turbines for  powering the aircraft more efficiently, possibly including:  ◦ improved combustion emission measures,  improvements in cold and hot section materials, and the  use of turbine blade/vane technology;  ◦ investigation of all-electric, fuel-cell gas turbine and  electric gas turbine hybrid propulsion devices;  ◦ electric propulsion technologies comprise advanced  lightweight motors, motor controllers and power  conditioning equipment (icao 2008).22    the scenario projects a 50% improvement in specific energy  consumption on a per passenger-km basis for future aircrafts  in 2050 based on todays energy intensities. figure 12.8  shows the energy intensities in the energy [r]evolution  scenario for international, intraregional and domestic aviation.  finally figure 12.9 shows the final energy consumption by  technologies in the reference and in both energy  [r]evolution scenarios.  passenger and freight trains  transport of passengers and freight by rail is currently one of  the most energy efficient means of transport. however, there  is still potential to reduce the specific energy consumption of  trains. apart from operational and policy measures to reduce  energy consumption like raising the load factor of trains,  technological measures to reduce energy consumption of  future trains are necessary, too. key technologies are:  • reducing the total weight of a train as the most significant  measure to reduce traction energy consumption. by using  lightweight structures and lightweight materials, the energy  needed to overcome inertial and grade resistances as well  as friction from tractive resistances can be reduced.  • aerodynamic improvements to reduce aerodynamic drag,  especially important when running on high velocity. a  reduction of aerodynamic drag is typically achieved by  streamlining the profile of the train.    • switch from diesel-fuelled to more energy efficient  electrically driven trains.  • improvements in the traction system to further reduce  frictional losses. technical options include improvements of  the major components and in energy management software.  • regenerative braking to recover waste energy. the energy  can either be transferred back into the grid or stored onboard  in an energy storage device. regenerative braking is  especially effective in regional traffic with frequent stops.  • improved space utilisation to achieve more efficient energy  consumption per passenger kilometre. the simplest way to  achieve this is to transport more passengers per train – in  other words, by a higher average load factor, more flexible  and shorter trainsets or by the use of double-decker trains  on highly frequented routes.  • improved accessory functions, such as for passenger  comfort. a high energy efficiency potential lies in the new  design of heating and cooling equipment. some strategies  for efficiency include adjustments to cabin design, changes  to air intakes, and using waste heat from traction.  by researching technologies for advanced high-speed trains,  the dlr’s ‘next Generation train’ project aims to reduce the  specific energy consumption per passenger-kilometre by  50% relative to existing high speed trains in the future.  the energy [r]evolution scenario uses energy intensity data  of (tosca 2011)23 for electric and diesel fuelled trains in  europe as input for our calculations. these data were  available for 2009 and as forecasts for 2025 and 2050.  the region-specific efficiency factors and shares of  diesel/electric traction traffic performance were used to  calculate energy intensity data per region (mj/p-km) for 2012  and up to 2050. the same methodology was applied for rail  freight transport.  electric trains as of today are about 2 to 3.5 times less  energy-intensive than diesel trains depending on the specific  type of rail transport, so the projections to 2050 include a  massive shift away from diesel to electric traction in the  energy [r]evolution 2050 scenario.  the region-specific efficiency factors for passenger rail take  into account higher load factors, for example in china and  india. energy intensity for freight rail is based on the  assumptions that regions with longer average distances for  freight rail (such as the us and russia) and where more raw  materials are transported (such as coal) show a lower energy  intensity than other regions (fulton & eads 2004).24 future  projections use ten-year historic iea data.  the calculation of possible future development in the rail  transport sector under the descripted assumption leads to the  results shown in figure 12.14. under the energy [r]evolution  scenarios over 90% of all rail lines are electrified by 2040.    heavy and medium duty vehicles (freight by road)  freight transport on the road forms the backbone of logistics  in many regions of the world. but apart from air freight  transport, it is the most energy-intensive way of moving  goods around. however, gradual progress is being made in  the fields of drivetrain efficiency, lightweight construction,  alternative power trains and fuels and so on.  this study projected a major shift in drivetrain market share of  medium (mdv) and heavy duty vehicles (hdv) in the energy  [r]evolution scenarios in the future. today, the great majority  of mdvs and hdvs have internal combustion engines, fuelled  mainly by diesel and in mdv also by a small share of gasoline  and gas (cnG and lpG). the energy [r]evolution model  includes a major shift to electric and fuel cell hydrogen-powered  vehicles (fcv) by 2050.  the electric mdv stock in the model developed by (dlr  2012) is mainly composed of battery electric vehicles (bev),  and a relevant share of hybrid electric vehicles (hev). hybrid  electric vehicles will have also displaced conventional internal  combustion engines in heavy duty vehicles. in addition to  this, both electric vehicles supplied with current via overhead  catenary lines and bevs are modelled in the energy  [r]evolution scenario for hdv applications.  siemens has proved the technical feasibility of the catenary  technology for trucks with experimental vehicles in its  ehighway project. the trucks are equipped with a hybrid  diesel powertrain to be able to operate when not connected  to the overhead line. When under a catenary line, the trucks  can operate fully electric at speeds of up to 90 km/h. apart  from electrically operated trucks fed by an overhead catenary,  inductive power supply via induction loops under the  pavement could become an option.  in addition to the electric truck fleet in the energy [r]evolution  scenario, hdv and mdv powered by fuel cells (fcv) were  integrated into the vehicle stock, too. fcv are beneficial especially  for long haul transports where no overhead catenary lines are  available and the driving range of bev would not be sufficient.  energy [r]evolution fleet average transport energy intensities  for mdv and hdv were derived using region-specific iea  energy intensity data of mdv and hdv transport by 2050  (Wbscd 2004),25 with the specific energy consumption factors  of table 12.4 applied to the iea data and matched with the  region-specific market shares of the power train technologies.  the reduction between the current situation and 2050 in the  advanced energy [r]evolution on a per tonne-km basis is  then 50-60% for mdv and hdv.    the dlr’s institute of vehicle concepts conducted special studies  to look at future vehicle concepts to see what the potential might  be for reducing the overall energy consumption of existing and  future trucks when applying energy efficient technologies (dlr  2012)/(dlr 2015). the approach shows the potential of different  technologies influencing the energy efficiency of future trucks and  also indicates possible cost developments.  inland navigation  technical measures to reduce energy consumption of inland  vessels include (van rompuy 2010)26:  • aerodynamic improvements to the hull to reduce friction resistance  • improving the propeller design to increase efficiency  • enhancing engine efficiency.  for inland navigation, we assumed a reduction of 40% of  global averaged energy intensity to 0.3 mj/t-km from the  current value of 0.5 mj/t-km.  marine transport  several technological measures can be applied to new vessels in  order to reduce overall fuel consumption in national and  international marine transport. these technologies are, for example:  • weather routing to optimise the vessel’s route  • autopilot adjustments to minimise steering  • improved hull coatings to reduce friction losses  • improved hull openings to optimise water flow  • air lubrication systems to reduce water resistances  • improvements in the design and shape of the hull and rudder  • waste heat recovery systems to increase overall efficiency  • improvement of the diesel engine (e.g. common-rail technology)  • installing new wind energy technologies such as towing  kites, flettner turbines and advanced sailing rigs to use  wind energy for propulsion  • using solar energy for on-board power demand  adding each technology effectiveness figure stated by (icct  2011),27 these technologies have a potential to improve energy  efficiency of new vessels between 18.4% and about 57%.  another option to reduce energy demand of ships is simply to  reduce operating speeds. up to 36% of fuel consumption can  be saved by reducing the vessel’s speed by 20%. a 25%  reduction of fuel consumption for an international marine diesel  fleet is achievable by using more efficient alternative propulsion  devices only (eyring et al. 2005).28 up to 30% reduction in  energy demand is achievable only by optimising the hull shape  and propulsion devices of new vessels (marintek 2000).29  the model assumes a total of 40% energy efficiency  improvement potential for international shipping. in order to  phase out fossil fuels entirely from marine transports, a mix of  energy efficiency (including new wind drives), biofuels and  synfuels powered engines are required.    box 12.1 | case study: wind powered ships  introduced to commercial operation in 2007, the skysails  system uses wind power, which has no fuel costs, to  contribute to the motion of large freight-carrying ships, which  currently use increasingly expensive and environmentally  damaging oil. instead of a traditional sail fitted to a mast, the  system uses large towing kites to contribute to the ship’s  propulsion. shaped like paragliders, they are tethered to the  vessel by ropes and can be controlled automatically,  responding to wind conditions and the ship’s trajectory.  the kites can operate at altitudes of between 100 and 300  metres, where there are stronger and more stable winds. With  dynamic flight patterns, the skysails are able to generate five  times more power per square metre of sail area than  conventional sails. depending on the prevailing winds, the  company claims that a ship’s average annual fuel costs can  be reduced by 10% to 35%. under optimal wind conditions,  fuel consumption can temporarily be cut by 50%.  on the first voyage of the beluga skysails, a 133 m long  specially-built cargo ship, the towing kite propulsion system  was able to temporarily substitute for approximately 20% of  the vessel’s main engine power, even in moderate winds.  the company is now planning a kite twice the size of this  160m2 pilot.  the designers say that virtually all sea-going cargo vessels  can be retro- or outfitted with the skysails propulsion sytsem  without extensive modifications.  besides skysails, there are flettner-rotors, new sailing rigs  such as dynariG and other wind energy systems for ships in  development. Greenpeace supports the implementation of  new wind energy technologies to reduce marine fuel demand  and to replace bunker fuels and demands for financial  support program for research and development (r&d).  passenger cars  many technologies can be used to improve the fuel efficiency  of passenger cars. examples include improvements in  engines, weight reduction as well as friction and drag  reduction.  the impact of the various measures on fuel efficiency can be  substantial. hybrid vehicles, combining a conventional  combustion engine with an electric engine, have relatively low  fuel consumption. the most well-known is the toyota prius,  which originally had a fuel efficiency of about 5 litres of  gasoline equivalent per 100 km (litre ge/100 km). in 2012,  toyota presented an improved version with a lower fuel    we have assumed that the occupancy rate for cars remains  nearly the same as in 2009, as shown in figure 12.13.  table 12.5 summarises the energy efficiency improvement  for passenger transport in the energy [R]evolution 2050  scenario and table 12.6 shows the energy efficiency  improvement for freight transport in the advanced energy  [R]evolution 2050 scenario.  figure 12.14 provides an overview about electric transport  vehicles for urban areas. the figures are results of a specific  research commissioned from greenpeace international for  public and energy efficient individual transport technologies.  energy  [r]evolution  12  consumption of 4.3 litres ge/100 km. new lightweight  materials, in combination with new propulsion technologies,  can bring fuel consumption levels down to 1 litre ge/100 km.  the figure 12.12 gives the energy intensities calculated using  power train market shares and efficiency improvements for LDv in  the Reference scenario and in the energy [R]evolution scenario.  the energy intensities for car passenger transport are currently  highest in oecD north america and lowest in oecD europe.  the Reference scenario shows a decrease in energy intensities  in all regions, but the division between highest and lowest will  remain the same, although there will be some convergence.      12.3 prOJectiOn Of the future car market  12.3.1 prOJectiOn Of the future technOlOgy mix  achieving the substantial co2 -reduction targets in the energy  [R]evolution scenario would require a radical shift in fuels for  cars and other light duty vehicles. for viable, full  electrification based on renewable energy sources, the model  assumes that petrol and diesel fuelled autonomous hybrids  and plug-in hybrids that we have today are phased out  already by 2050 in the advanced energy [R]evolution  scenario. thus, two generations of hybrid technologies will  pave the way for the complete transformation to light duty  vehicles with full battery electric or hydrogen fuel cell  powertrains. this is the only way that is efficient enough for  the use of renewable energy to reach the co2 -targets in the  car sector.  in the future, it may not be possible to power cars for all  purposes by rechargeable batteries only. therefore, hydrogen  and synfuels are required as a renewable fuel especially for  larger cars including light commercial vehicles. biofuels and  synfuels will be used in other applications where a  substitution is even harder than for cars. figure 12.15 shows  the share of fuel cell vehicles (autonomous hybrids) and full  battery electric vehicles (grid connectable) in 2050 in the new  vehicle market according to the projections in (DLR 2012).  12.3.2 prOJectiOn Of the future vehicle segment split  the scenario is constructed to disaggregate the light-duty  vehicle sales into three segments: small, medium and large  vehicles. this model shows the effect of ‘driving small urban  cars’ to see if they are suitable for megacities of the future.  the size and co2 emissions of the vehicles are particularly  interesting in the light of the enormous growth predicted in  the LDv stock. for our purposes, we could divide up the  numerous car types as follows:  • the very small car bracket includes city, super-mini, minicompact  cars as well as one and two seaters.  • the small sized bracket includes compact and subcompact  cars, micro and subcompact vans and small suvs.  • the medium sized bracket includes car derived vans and  small station wagons, upper medium class, midsize cars  and station wagons, executive class, compact passenger  vans, car derived pickups, medium suvs, 2wD and 4wD.  • the large car bracket includes all kinds of luxury class, luxury  multi-purpose vehicles, medium and heavy vans, compact  and full-size pickup trucks (2wD, 4wD), standard and luxury  suvs. in addition, we looked at light duty trucks in north  america and light commercial vehicles in china separately.    2050  in examining the segment split, we have focused most  strongly on the two world regions which will be the largest  emitters of co2 from cars in 2050: north america and china.  in north america today, the small vehicle segment is almost  non-existent. we found it necessary to introduce here small  cars substantially, triggered by rising fuel prices and possibly  vehicle taxes. for china, we have anticipated a similar share  of the mature car market as for europe and projected that the  small segment will grow by 3% per year at the expenses of  the larger segments in the light of rising mass mobility. the  segment split is shown in figure 12.16.  12.3.3 prOJectiOn Of the future switch tO  alternative fuels  a switch to renewable fuels in the car fleet is one of the  cornerstones of the low co2 car scenario, with the most  prominent element the direct use of renewable electricity in  cars. the different types of electric and hybrid cars, such as  battery electric and plug-in hybrid, are summarised as ‘plug-in  electric’. their introduction will start in industrialised countries  between 2015 and 2020, following an s-curve pattern, and are  projected to reach 35-40% of total LDv sales in the eu, north  america and the oecD asia oceania by 2050. Due to the  higher costs of the technology and renewable electricity  availability, we have slightly delayed progress in other  countries. more cautious targets are applied for africa.  there are huge differences in forecasts for the growth of  vehicle sales in developing countries. in general, the increase  in sales and thus vehicle stock and ownership is linked to the  forecast of gDp growth, which is a well-established  correlation in the science community. however, this scenario  analysis found that technology shift in LDvs alone – although  linked to enormous efficiency gains and fuel switch - is not  enough to fulfil the ambitious energy [R]evolution co2 targets.  a slowdown of vehicle sales growth and a limitation or even  reduction in vehicle ownership per capita compared to the  Reference scenario was thus required.  global urbanisation, the on-going rise of megacities, where  space for parking is scarce, and the trend starting today that  ownership of cars might not be seen as desirable as in the  past draws a different scenario of the future compared to the  reference case. going against the global pattern of a century,  this development would have to be supported by massive  policy intervention to promote modal shift and alternative  forms of car usage. for megacities, greenpeace  commissioned an additional specific research, key results are  presented in table 12.7.  12.3.4 prOJectiOn Of the future kilOmetres driven  per year  until a full shift from fossil to renewable fuels has taken place,  driving on the road will create co2 emissions. thus, driving  less contributes to our target for emissions reduction.  however, this shift does not have to mean reduced mobility  equally because there are many excellent opportunities for  shifts from individual passenger road transport towards less  co2 -intensive public and non-motorised transport.  Data on average annual kilometres driven are uncertain in  many world regions except for north america, europe and  recently china. the scenario starts from the state-of-the-art  knowledge on how LDvs are driven in the different world  regions and then projects a decline in car usage. this is a  further major building block in the low carbon strategy of the  energy [R]evolution scenarios, which goes hand in hand  with new mobility concepts like co-modality and car-sharing  concepts. in 2050, policies supporting the use of public  transport and environmental friendly modes are anticipated  to be in place in all world regions. our scenario of annual  kilometres driven (akD) by LDvs is shown in figure 12.17.  in total, akD fall almost by one quarter until 2050 compared  to 2012.    figure 12.18 shows the final energy consumption by  technologies under 3 scenarios for road transport. the  implementation of new alternatives drives – mainly in  combination with electric machines – start to have an impact  after 2025 and can take over a significant share after 2035.  synfuels, however are believed to be equally important  especially for large vehicles including trucks and busses.    12.4 cOnclusiOn  in a business as usual world we project a high rise of  transport energy demand until 2050 in all world regions in the  Reference scenario, which is fuelled especially by fast  developing countries like china and india.  the aim of this chapter was therefore to show ways to  reduce energy demand in general and the dependency on  climate damaging fossil fuels in the transport sector. the  findings of our scenario calculations show that a combination  of behavioural changes and tremendous technical efforts is  needed in order to reach the ambitious energy reduction  goals of the energy [R]evolution scenario:  • a decrease of passenger and freight kilometres on a per  capita base  • a massive shift to electrically and hydrogen powered vehicles  whose energy sources may be produced by renewables  • a gradual decrease of all modes’ energy intensities by  technological progress  • a modal shift from aviation to high speed rail and from road  freight to rail freight.  these measures must of course be accompanied by major  efforts in the installation and extension of the necessary  infrastructures as for example in railway networks hydrogen  and battery charging infrastructure for electric vehicles and  an electrification of highways.  figure 12.19 shows the development of the regional shares of  transport demands by region under both energy [R]evolution  scenarios between 2012 and 2050. the main difference is a  more equal distribution of the transport energy demand  across all regions in regard to transport energy per person.  