OXFAM AMERICA  RESEARCH BACKGROUNDER  Climate change,  equity, and stranded  assets  Simon Caney    Series editor: Kimberly Pfeifer  Oxfam America’s Research Backgrounders are designed to inform and foster  discussion about topics critical to poverty reduction. The series explores a range  of issues on which Oxfam America works—all within the broader context of  international development and humanitarian relief. The series was designed to  share Oxfam America’s rich research with a wide audience in hopes of fostering  thoughtful debate and discussion. All Backgrounders are available as  downloadable PDFs on our website, , and may be  distributed and cited with proper attribution (please see below).  Topics of Oxfam America’s Research Backgrounders are selected to support  Oxfam’s development objectives or key aspects of our policy work. Each  Backgrounder represents an initial effort by Oxfam to inform the strategic  development of our work, and each is either a literature synthesis or original  research, conducted or commissioned by Oxfam America. All Backgrounders  have undergone peer review.  Oxfam America’s Research Backgrounders are not intended as advocacy or  campaign tools; nor do they constitute an expression of Oxfam America policy.  The views expressed are those of the authors—not necessarily those of Oxfam.  Nonetheless, we believe this research constitutes a useful body of work for all  readers interested in poverty reduction.  For a full list of available Backgrounders, please see the “Research  Backgrounder Series Listing” section of this report.  Author information and acknowledgments  Simon Caney is Professor of Philosophy, Politics, and Economics, in the  Department of Politics and International Relations at the University of Oxford. He  is a Tutor and Fellow at Magdalen College, and is also the Co-Director of the  Oxford Martin Programme on Human Rights for Future Generations.  The author is grateful for extensive very instructive comments from the  anonymous referees. Their comments have greatly improved the paper.  Citations of this paper  Please use the following format when citing this paper:  Caney, Simon. “Climate change, equity, and stranded assets.” Oxfam America  Research Backgrounder series (2016):   4 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  /research-publications/climate-change-equity-and-stranded-assets.  For permission to publish a larger excerpt, please email your request to  permissions@oxfamamerica.org.  5 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder  ACRONYMS AND ABBREVIATIONS  HDI Human Development Index  REDD Reducing emissions from deforestation and forest degradation  UNFCCC United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change  6 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  BACKGROUND TO THE PAPER  Oxfam’s principal mission is to eradicate poverty and injustice. To this end the  organization is engaged in programs working to address climate change, both by  building resilience and by limiting the concentration of greenhouse gasses in the  atmosphere with a target of limiting global temperature rise to no more than  1.5oC. At the same time Oxfam also has programming focused on ensuring  countries with natural resources (including fossil fuel reserves) use those  resources to address poverty and drive development.  These three program efforts together present conflicts as well as synergies. On  the one hand it is clear that advocating for the exploitation of fossil fuel reserves  as a means to fund development will, at some point, come into conflict with  efforts to limit the emission of greenhouse gases. At the same time, the revenues  available from the exploitation of fossil fuels could be used to fund both  adaptation to climate change, as well as the shift towards renewables and a zero  carbon economy.  Oxfam’s unique set of priorities have caused it to reflect on how to resolve these  contradictions and capitalize on the synergies. An outcome of this process was  the realization that while international agreements on climate change placed a  significant focus on ideas of equity and fairness (mainly through the notion of  common but differentiated responsibilities), such a framing was almost  completely lacking when considering the issue of which countries should bear the  greatest burden of having their assets stranded.  In response, Oxfam America’s Extractive Industries team decided to consult with  a political philosopher to explore whether the equity concerns that dominate  international climate change discussions might have relevance to the question of  stranded assets. The result is this paper, which notes that equity concerns on  stranded assets are relevant, yet they are not prominently discussed and there is  little to no research on the topic.  When reading this paper, it should be noted that the intention in publishing it is  not to advocate for a policy position, or motivate for a particular campaign  strategy. Instead the hope is that this work could serve to initiate some  conversation on how to address the challenging question of balancing meeting  development imperatives, managing extractive industries, minimizing climate  change, and adapting to its impacts.  7 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  The findings of the paper are as follows:  First, there are inescapable equity issues surrounding the stranding of fossil fuel  assets. Such issues raise unavoidable questions, including:   Whose fossil fuels are to be left in the ground?   What criteria should we employ to decide who has the best case for using  the fossil fuels that may be used?   Is compensation owed to those who leave their fossil fuels in the ground?  If so, who pays?  In addition, the equity issues that arise can be approached from within the  framework that affirms the principle of Common but Differentiated Responsibility  and Respective Capabilities. In short, this paper confirms the “hypothesis that  there are equity concerns regarding stranded assets which are currently not  accounted for in climate negotiations, but which could reasonably fall within the  logic of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities.”Second, while there is an extensive literature on the equitable distribution of the  burdens of combating climate change and the equitable transition to a low carbon  world, these have focused overwhelmingly on consumption of fossil fuels and the  emission of greenhouse gases (and not on the production and sale of those fossil  fuels). Similarly, while there is a large literature on stranded fossil fuel assets this  focuses more on the implications for investors and on the economic implications  of stranded assets, and does not discuss the issues of equity and fairness that  arise. Furthermore, while there is valuable work on extractive industries and  natural resources, this is not primarily focused on the specific case of limiting the  use of coal, oil, and gas because of their effects on the climate system and the  ethical issues arising from that. Finally, while there are detailed analyses of  decarbonization and development these also do not examine the equity issues.  In short, then, there has been little “work to date which has explored the  proposed means to account for these equity issues around the stranding of  assets.”That said, the literature on the equitable response to climate change does—in  conjunction with the other literatures mentioned—provide a useful framework by  which to analyses the equity issues surrounding the stranding of assets. So,  even though ethical analyze have not thus far been applied to the stranding of  1 The ‘Research Scope of Work,’ p.2.  2 The ‘Research Scope of Work,’ p.2.  8 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  fossil fuel assets it is possible to do so, and that is what this paper has sought to  do.  Third, there has been little “commentary on the merits of different  decarbonization tools in terms of their capacity to account for the potential equity  implications of stranded assets.”  There has been considerable discussion of the Yasuní-ITT Initiative and the  problems it encountered. Lessons can be learned from this on how to implement  similar initiatives in the future (for example, ensuring that there is a reliable  stream of revenue). However, the focus of that research has not been directly on  the equity implications of the Initiative.  Fourth, the paper has examined the following question: What would likely be  entailed in undertaking an assessment which sought to prioritize the order in  which countries should have their assets stranded (HDI, historical emissions,  carbon intensity of the economy, available resources, climate vulnerability,  governance structures (for delivery of services), etc.)?  In reply: it has found that an assessment which sought to prioritize the order in  which countries should have their assets stranded should be informed by:  a) Its level of development as reflected in its HDI,  b) Its historical responsibility defined in terms of past extraction and past  benefits from extraction, and  c) The availability of resources and forms of energy and sources of  development.  Other considerations cited—carbon intensity, climate vulnerability, and  governance structures—while important, do not in themselves determine an  equitable distribution of claims to extract fossil fuels.Fifth, the paper has examined the following question: What would be the  implications of an equity approach to stranding assets on the idea of common but  differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities? Of particular interest is  whether such an approach to stranding assets further explodes the binary  classification of developed vs. developing nations in common but differentiated  responsibilities and respective capabilities.In doing so, it found that an equity approach to stranding assets would  undermine the binary classification of countries as either developed or not  developed and would call for a more nuanced framework in which countries  would be placed on a continuum.    9 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder  Sixth and finally, the paper has addressed the question: Would raising questions  around equity and stranded assets generate major political risks to the UNFCCC  process?It found that raising questions about equity and stranded assets might encounter  resistance from developed countries which have fossil fuel reserves; and that  moving away from a binary classification and differentiating between different  developing countries might encounter resistance from some developing  countries. However, it also noted ways in which these obstacles can be  addressed and that a process for stranding fossil fuel assets could be designed  in ways that share some features with existing programs like REDD and the  CDM. So the political feasibility problems are not insuperable.  5 The ‘Research Scope of Work,’ p.3.  10 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  INTRODUCTION  Preventing dangerous climate change will require that many fossil fuels—oil, coal  and gas—should not be used, and should instead be left in the ground.6 The  creation of such “stranded assets” raises questions of equity: Who may use the  remaining fossil fuels? What would be the fairest allocation of the opportunity to  extract these fossil fuels? What criteria should be employed to answer this  question? And, what, if anything, is owed to those who are required to leave their  fossil fuels unused?  The objective of this research is to identify and evaluate the ethical issues  surrounding stranded fossil fuel assets. It works on the “hypothesis that there are  equity concerns regarding stranded assets which are currently not accounted for  in climate negotiations, but which could reasonably fall within the logic of  common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities.”7 With this  in mind, it provides an overview of the literatures on equity and climate change  and their application to these issues.  The paper has the following structure. It is divided into two parts. Part 1 provides  a necessary framework and sets out the questions to be examined and methods  to be employed. This includes a necessary overview of the empirical background  and the context; the setting out of the questions to be examined; and the  outlining of the normative and conceptual framework that underpin the analysis.  Finally, Part 1 closes by setting out the kinds of methods and literature to be  employed.  Having defined the questions, concepts, and methods to be employed, Part 2  engages in the substantive analysis. It examines why, and to what extent,  stranded carbon assets give rise to questions of equity. It further explores the  criteria that might be used to determine who has the best claim to existing fossil  fuel reserves, evaluating six criteria. The work then analyzes the implications of  an equitable treatment of existing fossil fuel reserves, and closes by considering  the political risks of focusing on the equitable distribution of fossil fuels.  6 Note this rests on the assumption that there will not be large-scale deployment of Carbon Capture and  Storage (CCS), at least not in the immediate future. Were there to be extensive CCS then the case for  leaving fossil fuels in the ground would be weakened. For a recent overview of the state of play with regards  to CCS see the discussion in the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change’s Fifth Assessment Report by  Thomas Bruckner and Igor Alexeyevich Bashmakov (2014, pp.517 & 532-533). See also McGlade and Ekins’  finding that “the reserves of coal that can be burned are only six percentage points higher when CCS is  allowed, with the utilization of gas and oil increasing by an even smaller fraction (around two percentage  points). Because of the expense of CCS, its relatively late date of introduction (2025), and the assumed  maximum rate at which it can be built, CCS has a relatively modest effect on the overall levels of fossil fuel  that can be produced before 2050 in a 2°C scenario” (McGlade and Ekins 2015, p.190).  7 This is quoted from p.2 of the ‘Research Scope of Work’  11 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder  THE CONTEXT  To explore the equity implications of the use of remaining fossil fuels, it is  essential to provide some context. This section thus sets out that context. The  starting point of the analysis is that there is an imperative to prevent “dangerous  anthropogenic interference with the climate system” (United Nations’ Framework  Convention on Climate Change, Article 2).8 This commitment to preventing  dangerous climate change has often been defined in terms of ensuring that  global mean temperatures do not rise by more than 2°C (3.6 Fahrenheit) over  pre-industrial times (although see below for recent developments). Although this  2°C target has been widely endorsed by policymakers, and so estimates for  allocating greenhouse gas emissions have often been based on this figure, it  should be noted that Oxfam has endorsed a commitment to keeping any global  average temperature rise below 1.5°C.  Meeting the 2°C target (and certainly meeting the 1.5°C target) requires a  considerable reduction in the emission of greenhouse gases and the move to a  less intensive carbon society. The magnitude of the challenge is evident from the  Fifth Assessment Report of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change  (IPCC). Chapter 12 of the Fifth Assessment Report reports that  “To limit the warming caused by anthropogenic CO2 emissions alone to  be likely less than 2°C relative to the period 1861-1880, total CO2  emissions from all anthropogenic sources would need to be limited to a  cumulative budget of about 1000 PgC since that period. About half [4to 585 PgC] of this budget was already emitted by 2011” (Collins and  Knutti 2013, p.1033).On current trajectories this means that humanity will emit the total “cumulative  budget” by 2040, thereby committing us, within the next 25 years, to a more than  50% chance of a 2°C increase in global mean temperatures over pre-industrial  times.It is salutary to observe that this projection focuses solely on carbon dioxide. If  other greenhouse gases are included then the situation is even more serious.  The passage from the Fifth Assessment Report quoted above continues:  “Accounting for projected warming effect of non-CO2 forcing, a possible release  of GHGs from permafrost or methane hydrates, or requiring a higher likelihood of      12 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  temperatures remaining below 2°C, all imply a lower budget” (Collins and Knutti  2013, p.1033).11 In other words, if we include all greenhouse gases then the  “cumulative budget” left available to humanity is even less than the roughly half a  trillion tons, and the deadline even closer. Preventing dangerous climate change,  thus, requires an aggressive commitment to mitigation.  As noted above, most estimates have been defined in terms of meeting a 2°C  target. It is thus very important to note that in the recent Paris Agreement that  was agreed in December 2015, a lower target was also included.12 Article 2.1(a)  of the Paris Agreement specifies the goal as  “Holding the increase in the global average temperature to well below 2°C  above pre-industrial levels and to pursue efforts to limit the temperature  increase to 1.5°C above pre-industrial levels, recognizing that this would  significantly reduce the risks and impacts of climate change”.Of course, this kind of target entails an even smaller greenhouse gas budget.One implication of a serious commitment to mitigation is that many fossil fuels  (oil, coal) must remain unused or become stranded. As Christopher McGlade and  Paul Ekins write in their recent article in Nature, “Although there have previously  been fears over the scarcity of fossil fuels, in a climate-constrained world this is  no longer a relevant concern: large portions of the reserve base and an even  greater proportion of the resource base should not be produced if the  temperature rise is to remain below 2°C” (McGlade and Ekins 2015, p.190).This raises an important question of equity. Who may exploit the fossil fuel  reserves in their ownership and who may not? And, on what basis? Furthermore,  if people are disallowed from exploiting their fossil fuels does this justify  compensating them for the non-use? What would be an equitable response to  the necessity of leaving some fossil fuels in the ground?  This has important implications for developing countries, some of which contain  large reserves of fossil fuels. For example, Angola comes 149th out of 187 in a  ranking of countries by their Human Development Index, and Nigeria comes  152nd (equal with Cameroon). Furthermore, both are in the United Nations  Development Program’s “low human development” category (UNDP 2014,  p.162). And both have extensive oil reserves. The International Energy Agency  11 For projections of what the budget would be if other greenhouse gases were included see Collins and  Knutti (2013, p.1113: and pp.1107-113 more generally). They give three different projections depending on  what level of likelihood decision-makers want to have of meeting the 2°C target.  12 Some, such as the representatives of AOSIS, have campaigned for a 1.5°C target (Tschakert 2015).  13 For the Paris Agreement see .  14 For pessimistic commentary on the capacity to meet the targets in the Paris Agreement and the techniques  that might be employed to try to meet it see Anderson (2015).  15 For data on the coal, oil, and gas reserves that remain see IEA (2014, chapter 3 (oil), chapter 4 (natural  gas) and chapter 5 (coal)). It reports, for example, that there remain 1,699 billion barrels of oil in “proven  reserves” (that is reserves that it is 90% likely that they can be extracted at a profit), and 6,010 billion  barrels of conventional and unconventional oil reserves (IEA 2014, p.111).  13 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder  reports in its most recent annual report, World Energy Outlook 2014, that “[s]ub-  Saharan Africa as a whole has around 65 billion barrels of proven oil reserves,  equivalent to around 5% of the world total. Three-quarters of these oil reserves  are held in two countries (Nigeria and Angola)” (IEA 2014, p.464). In addition to  this, “Africa is estimated to have 52 tcm of remaining recoverable conventional  natural gas resources, of which 31 tcm are in sub-Saharan Africa” (IEA 2014,  p.465).  As Gavin Bridge and Philippe Le Billon write, “Developing through oil is an  aspiration for many oil-producing countries but the reality of everyday life for  many in Angola, Iraq, Iran, Libya, Kazakhstan, Nigeria, Congo, and Saudi Arabia  falls far short of this goal” (Bridge and Le Billon 2013, p.125). Other countries,  such as Ecuador, rely heavily on their oil reserves. Ecuador comes much  higher—at 98th—(UNDP 2014, p.161). It is, though, highly dependent on its oil.  Writing 7 years ago, Larrea and Warnars write that “[p]etroleum, the single most  important product of the economy, accounted for 54% of total exports in the last  decade, and petroleum revenues made up on average 26% of government  revenues between 2000 and 2007” (Larrea and Warnars 2009, p.219).  It is important not just that humanity avoid triggering dangerous climate change,  but also that the burdens involved in combating climate change are shared justly.  The dominant framework as to what constitutes equitable burden sharing adopts  the doctrine of “Common but Differentiated Responsibility and Respective  Capabilities.” This is explicitly affirmed in Article 3.1 of the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change, which states that  “The Parties should protect the climate system for the benefit of present and  future generations of humankind, on the basis of equity and in accordance  with their common but differentiated responsibilities and respective  capabilities. Accordingly, the developed country Parties should take the lead  in combating climate change and the adverse effects thereof.”This doctrine of Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and Respective  Capabilities was also affirmed in Article 10 of the Kyoto Protocol.17 Furthermore,  it continues to inform all climate negotiations and is reiterated in the Paris  16 See:    df.  Note the doctrine predates the UNFCCC. For an early statement see the ‘Report of the United Nations  Conference on Environment and Development’ (the Rio Declaration) (1992). Principle 7 of this Report states  “States shall cooperate in a spirit of global partnership to conserve, protect and restore the health and  integrity of the Earth's ecosystem. In view of the different contributions to global environmental  degradation, States have common but differentiated responsibilities. The developed countries acknowledge  the responsibility that they bear in the international pursuit of sustainable development in view of the  pressures their societies place on the global environment and of the technologies and financial resources  they command.”   14 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  Agreement—in the Preamble and Article 2.2 and Article 4.19.18 On this approach,  all states have a shared responsibility to prevent harmful climatic changes (so the  responsibility is “common” to all), but some have greater responsibilities than  others, depending on how much they emitted and also what ability they have to  bear the burden (and so the responsibility is “differentiated”).The doctrine of “Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and Respective  Capabilities” has, to a large extent, been applied to the emission of greenhouse  gases. The focus has, thus, been largely on the “production process” and its  emission of greenhouse gases,20 and there has been much less focus on the  extraction of fossil fuels. This paper explores the issues surrounding the latter.  There is a strong case for doing so. As Paul Collier and Anthony Venables point  out, it is important to tackle the problem of climate change at root. Focusing  exclusively on those who use fossil fuels in the productive process (or, to go one  step further, to put one’s focus on consumers) multiplies problems because there  are so many producers and users, and there is a high likelihood of “leakage”  (Collier and Venables 2014, pp.493-494). For example, since many can burn  fossil fuels throughout the world, focusing on the productive process requires  widespread compliance by a very large proportion of these different actors. Given  this, it makes sense to consider measures that focus on the point of extraction:  for if one can do this successfully, one can reduce such leakage problems  (Collier and Venables 2014, pp.493-494).21At this point it should be noted that  some have sought to implement equitable policies concerning stranded fossil fuel  assets. The most notable of these is the Yasuní-ITT Initiative.22 The Initiative  18 See .  19 For an illuminating account of Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and Respective Capacities see  Rajamani (2006).  20 One exception to this is work on “consumption-based” accounting of greenhouse gas emissions rather  than “production-based” accounting. Consumption-based approaches focus on the emissions associated by  those consuming goods and services. Given the extent of emissions embodied in trade, consumption-based  and production-based accounting can diverge quite dramatically. See Davis and Caldeira (2010).  21 Collier and Venables discuss two kinds of leakage. The first (referred to in the text above) is what they  term “international leakage”: this refers to a situation in which if one group of agents implements some  demand-side policies (such as carbon taxes), consumers shift to another group of agents which does not  employ such policies (Collier and Venables 2014, pp.493-494 & 497-499). The second kind is what they term  “inter-temporal leakage”: this refers to a situation in which if one group of agents proposes to implement  some demand-side policies in the future, then consumers seek to increase their consumption now before  the policies are applied (Collier and Venables 2014, pp.494, 497 & 499-500). Their claim is that given this a  focus on the extractive process (a supply-side approach) is desirable.  The first kind of leakage might be argued to have more force than the second. The reason for this is  that the claim that the advance notification of a policy in the future might generate an increase in current  consumption seems to apply with force whether the policy is a demand-side one that applies instruments  such as carbon taxes or a supply-side one that seeks to reduce extraction at source. For a plan to implement  such a supply-side policy in the future would also generate incentives to increase extraction now. The first  argument, however, about the extent of leakage in the global economy where there is no effective regime  ensuring compliance with demand-side policies is hard to dispute.  22 What follows draws on the illuminating discussions of Ecuador’s Yasuní ITT Initiative by Matt Finer, Remi  Moncel, and Clinton N. Jenkins (2010, pp.63-66); Carlos Larrea and Lavinia Warnars (2009, pp.219-223);  Joan Martinez-Alier, Nnimmo Bassey, and Patrick Bond (2013); Laura Rival (2010, pp.358-365); María  Cristina Vallejo, Rafael Burbano, Fander Falconí, and Carlos Larrea (2015, pp.175-185).  15 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder  concerns the large oil reserves in the Ishpingo–Tambococha–Tiputini oil fields,  located in the Yasuní National Park in Ecuador. The Yasuní-ITT Initiative was  first developed in 2007. Put at its simplest, the Initiative involved Ecuador not  using the oil reserves (and thereby not contributing to climate change), in  exchange for which it would be paid, thereby enabling Ecuador to develop. The  sum of oil at stake was considerable. A recent study reported that it involved “8million barrels of heavy crude oil” (indeed possibly up to 921 billion barrels in  reserve) and if it all remained in the ground it would result in a saving of 4million metric tons of CO2 (Vallejo, Burbano, Falconí, and Larrea (2015, p.175).  A Trust Fund was set up in 2010 to fund it (Martinez-Alier 2013). Thus, in  principle, this is an interesting case of stranding fossil fuel assets (thereby  contributing to mitigating climate change, among other things) while at the same  time compensating Ecuador, thereby contributing to its standard of living.  Unfortunately, the Initiative faltered. In August 2013 President Rafael Correa  declared that insufficient funds had been raised, and so drilling for oil  recommenced (Martinez-Alier 2013). This does not mean that it is not possible to  implement a scheme in which “not extracting fossil fuels” is compensated for  (and indeed there are many policies in which “non-use” of a natural resource—or  protection of environmental service—is paid for), but it does suggest that it needs  to learn from the problems that the Yasuní-ITT Initiative has faced.  16 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  THE QUESTIONS  Having provided the general background, this section turns to the core questions  to be examined in the remainder of the paper. The central overarching question  to be examined in this paper concerns the equitable treatment of those with fossil  fuel reserves. In the course of examining different answers to this question, the  analysis will be guided by six more specific questions to be examined. These are  specified as follows23.  1. The overall focus of this research is reliant on a normative assumption  regarding the equity implications of stranded assets. As such an initial  question of this research pertains to the merits of the ethical arguments,  both for and against the position that the issue of stranded assets should  incorporate equity considerations. Of particular interest is whether these  arguments are consonant or not with the notion of common but  differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities.  2. Has there been any work to date which has explored the proposed means  to account for these equity issues around the stranding of assets?  3. Is there any commentary on the merits of different decarbonization tools  in terms of their capacity to account for the potential equity implications of  stranded assets?  4. What would likely be entailed in undertaking an assessment which sought  to prioritize the order in which countries should have their assets stranded  (HDI, historical emissions, carbon intensity of the economy, available  resources, climate vulnerability, governance structures (for delivery of  services), etc.)?  5. What would be the implications of an equity approach to stranding assets  on the idea of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective  capabilities? Of particular interest is whether such an approach to  stranding assets further explodes the binary classification of developed  vs. developing nations in common but differentiated responsibilities and  respective capabilities.  6. Would raising questions around equity and stranded assets generate  major political risks to the UNFCCC process?23 These questions were generated by a Scope of Work that was conceived of by Oxfam and  which formed the basis of engagement with the consultant.  24 This is quoted from pp.2-3 of the ‘Research Scope of Work.’  17 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder  THE CONCEPTUAL FRAMEWORK  This section outlines the conceptual framework that will be employed.  Two concepts play a central role in the analysis. The first of these is equity. The  paper employs the notion of “Equity” specified in the Scope of Work.25 Equity  refers to what is fair and just. It is a distinctive value and should not be equated  with other traditional values like “charity” or “benevolence.” It refers to what is  owed to individuals—what they can claim as a matter of right, and not just what is  efficient. There are many different accounts of equity—ranging from egalitarian  ones to libertarian ones—but what they have in common is a commitment to  giving each person their due, and what they are entitled to.  A further point about equity: sometimes equity is used to refer to procedurally fair  decision-making processes. The focus on this paper is on equity as a  “substantive ideal”: that is, one that concerns the distribution of social, economic,  and environmental burdens and benefits. The paper will be in line with the values  expressed in Oxfam’s “Hang Together or Hang Separately” (2009).  Second, the paper seeks to develop principles and policies that are compatible  with other goals and objectives, and as such, policy consonance is a central  concept. For example, policies designed to prevent dangerous climate change  will impact considerably on other kinds of policy—most notably attempts to  develop and eradicate poverty. The aim then is to identify equitable principles  concerning stranding fossil fuel assets that contribute to the mitigation of  dangerous climate change but do so in ways that recognize rights to develop.  Finally, in terms of scope it should be noted that the research focuses  exclusively on the fossil fuels—such as coal, oil, and natural gas. It does not  discuss other extractive industries such as minerals.  25 See p.3 of the ‘Research Scope of Work.’  18 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  RESEARCH DESIGN  This research draws on the literatures on extractive industries, climate change,  and development. More specifically, it draws on:   Literature in ethics on the responsibilities to combat climate change and  the doctrine of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective  capabilities. This includes work by moral and political philosophers  (Caney 2005, 2010a,b, 2012, 2014; Gardiner et al.; Shue 2014;  Vanderheiden 2008), as well as work by Oxfam (2009) and EcoEquity’s  work on “Greenhouse Development Rights”)26. As part of this, it also  draws on the literature on the equity implications of a transition to a low  carbon society where relevant (for example, Nuffield Council on Bioethics  (2011, chapter 4); Newell et al. (2015)).   Literature on stranded assets, and stranded fossil fuel assets in particular.  This includes work such as Carbon Tracker (2013), Johnson et al. (2015,  pp.89–102), Lecuyer and Vogt-Schilb (2014), and Rozenberg, Vogt-  Schilb and Hallegatte (2014).   Literature on Low Carbon Development. This includes research such as  Marianne Fay et al. (2015) Decarbonizing Development, David Victor  (2011), analyses of different energy sources (IEA 2014), and the  assessment reports of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.   Literature on natural resource management and development. This  includes work by Michael Ross (2012, 2015), Leif Wenar (2016), Paul  Collier (2007, pp.38-52), David Victor, David Hults, and Mark Thurber  (2012). It also includes Natural Resource Governance Institute (2014),  the policies of the Extractive Industries Transparency Initiative (ETTI),and Oxfam’s work on “natural resources and rights.”One important point should be stressed here. The above literatures are all  relevant to the issues being explored in this paper. However, there is very little  work that both discusses the stranding of fossil fuel assets and does so with a  concern to determine what an equitable response would be. The second  question posed on page 16 asks:  “Has there been any work to date which has explored the proposed means to  account for these equity issues around the stranding of assets?”    The short answer to this is: no. There has been little work on the ways in which  one might account for the equity issues surrounding the stranding of assets.  There has been much work on the equitable response to climate change (see the  philosophical literature listed above). There has also been a considerable amount  of research on stranded assets, including stranded fossil fuel assets. There has  also been considerable discussion of the Yasuní-ITT Initiative.29 However, what  has been absent is analysis of different ways to account for the equity issues  surrounding the stranding of assets. The research on stranded fossil fuel assets  has focused on the implications for investors and business.30 The focus of work  and policies on extractive industries has often not focused directly on the  ecological limits of extraction.This paper thus draws on both the ethical and empirical literatures above to  answer these questions.  20 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  THE EQUITY DIMENSIONS OF STRANDED ASSETS  Having set out the questions, conceptual framework, and research design, the  paper turns to substantive analysis and to consider the remaining questions  identified. The first question is whether (1) “the issue of stranded assets should  incorporate equity considerations” and, if so, (2) “whether these arguments are  consonant or not with the notion of common but differentiated responsibilities and  respective capabilities” (p.15 above).32 We can deal with the two parts of this  question in turn.  1. Should the Issue of Stranded Assets Incorporate Equity Considerations?  First, the question of which fossil fuel assets should be stranded, on what basis,  and whether there should be any compensation for those who have stranded  assets inescapably raises questions of equity. Equity concerns the fair  distribution of burdens and benefits. As John Rawls puts it in A Theory of Justice,  “principles of social justice…define the appropriate distribution of the benefits and  burdens of social cooperation” (Rawls 1999, p.4). Any decision about stranding  (fossil fuel) assets unavoidably impacts on different people’s benefits (the  opportunities available to some to use fossil fuels) and burdens (the opportunities  denied to some to use fossil fuel reserves). For example, any policy that grants  some developing countries privileged access to using fossil fuels like coal, gas,  and oil thereby confers an advantage on them, and a corresponding  disadvantage on members of other countries that are denied such access. As  such it cannot but raise questions of equity.  More specifically, it raises the following questions:  a) Who are the rights bearers? Do countries have moral rights to the coal,  oil, and gas within their jurisdiction? Does this mean that governments are  the legitimate moral owners of such natural resources? Or are the rights  bearers in these cases individual men and women?  b) What is the right principle of distributive justice? How should the benefits  of hydrocarbons be distributed? Should their benefits be shared equally?  Or primarily to some? Should the interests of the poor be prioritized? Or  those who have used least fossil fuels historically? What is an equitable  distribution?  c) If a country’s use of certain hydrocarbons is limited, is it (or its members)  entitled to compensation?  d) If so, who should bear the burden of compensating those entitled to  compensation?  32 This is quoted from p.2 of the ‘Research Scope of Work.’  21 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder  In short: imposing limits on the use of fossil fuels inevitably poses questions of  distributive justice about who is entitled to the benefits of hydrocarbons; which  ones may be used and which ones not, and on what basis; who, if anyone should  be compensated; and by whom?  Three further points should be noted.  A. An Analogy with REDD  First, a comparison with Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and forest  Degradation (REDD) may be instructive. REDD starts from the recognition that  forests play a vital role in absorbing CO2 and thus the mitigation of climate  change. In light of this, activities conducted under the heading of REDD seek to  protect forests and to reduce deforestation by paying those who would otherwise  engage in these activities not to do so.Although “preventing deforestation and protecting forests,” on the one hand, and  “not using fossil fuel reserves,” on the other, are not identical they are structurally  similar in morally relevant ways. In both cases there is an activity (using fossil  fuels/engaging in deforestation) that can have harmful effects on the climate  system (both increase the concentration of greenhouse gases in the  atmosphere). Furthermore, in both cases desisting from this activity (leaving  fossil fuels in the ground/not engaging in deforestation) imposes a cost on some;  and, thus, in both cases, there is a question of who should pay this cost.  Now, REDD is widely recognized to involve questions of justice.34 Given this, and  given the similarities between REDD and stranded fossil fuel assets, there is a  strong case for applying standards of equity to decisions concerning stranded  fossil fuel assets.  Indeed, there is perhaps an even stronger case for a proposal analogous to  paying people not to extract fossil fuels, namely that it is easier to quantify the  volume of fossil fuels not extracted than the absorption of carbon of the kind  required by REDD.B. States’ Rights  A second point: it might be said that the fossil fuels in question are located in  specific countries—such as Libya or Nigeria or Iran—and, on this basis, some  might say the ethical issues are rather straightforward. Individual countries own  the natural resources in their territory and, therefore, there are no complex  questions of equity. States—on this view—have the rights either to utilize the  resources for domestic consumption or to benefit by selling the resources that  they own as they see fit.In reply: this is not plausible on either moral or legal grounds. First, on moral  grounds, it is not self-evident that countries own all the natural resources within  their territory. Furthermore, even if we take states or countries to own the fossil  fuels contained in their jurisdiction, the question of ownership is not  straightforward and raises issues of equity. For example, who exactly owns the  resources in this situation? If fossil fuels are not stranded within a country who  may extract them and who has a claim to their benefits? If they are stranded and  a system of compensation is also put in place who are the rightful recipients?  One answer is that the government is the owner. However, is this plausible if the  government is run by, and in the interest of, an unaccountable political élite? In  light of this, some suggest that the citizens of a state own the resources located  within its jurisdiction. By this they mean that the people own the resources  contained in a state’s territory and thus are entitled to some of the proceeds  (Wenar 2016). Drawing on this idea some propose a system of basic income  derived from the country’s natural resources, and they draw inspiration from  systems like the Alaska Permanent Fund.37 We then face the questions of equity  concerning the fairest distribution of resources among citizens.  Some, however, might dispute whether the “government” or “the people”  necessarily owns the resources, arguing that the natural resources belong to  whoever owns the property in which the resources are located, which might  belong to a private individual or a group of individuals or a firm.  These views are not exhaustive of the options. Some adopt a “cosmopolitan”  perspective and would argue that natural resources are owned by all humanity,  and not the government or citizens of the state in which they are located or  individuals or firms. In defense of this proposition it is argued that whether a  country has a rich stock of resources in its territory or not is simply a matter of  luck: their location there is not something for which the people can claim credit.  They cannot be said to deserve these resources (Beitz 1999, pp.136-143). On  For discussion of the Alaska Permanent Fund and for analyses of the argument that the revenues from such  natural resources can, and should, be used to fund a basic income see Widerquist and Howard (2012).  23 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder  this basis, some argue that some portion of the proceeds from the world’s natural  resources should be shared globally (Pogge 2008, chapter 8).The central point here is that questions of justice and ethics are inescapable and  that questions of ownership rest on normative principles that stand in need of  justification.  In addition to this, it is widely recognized that there are moral limits on what  states may do with the natural resources in their jurisdiction. For example, they  have responsibilities to future generations, including future members of their own  society as well as members of other societies, and may not engage in actions  that fail to respect the legitimate interests of future generations (Brown Weiss  1989). In the context of climate change, this entails duties not to exceed a fair  share of emissions. Climate change undermines the rights of future generations  to life, health, food, and water (Caney 2010b). It also entails duties to act as a  good steward or trustee of the resources (Caney 2012b).  Finally, these moral points about the limits on a current government’s rights to  use natural resources like coal, oil, and gas are reflected in domestic and  international law. As Richard Barnes notes in Property Rights and Natural  Resources there are limits on the use of natural resources (Barnes 2009, p.232ff)  including limits under international environmental law (2009, pp.234-249). As he  further notes, there are also duties of stewardship—duties to conserve and  preserve land and natural resources for the benefit of future generations (Barnes  2009, pp.155-162). Many legal systems employ the concept of “public trust,” and  this has been interpreted as entailing fiduciary duties to protect renewable and  nonrenewable resources, and has led to “public trust litigation” to protect the  environment.For these reasons, the fact that coal, oil, and gas are located within the  jurisdiction of states does not entail that these are not subject to legal and ethical  principles.  C. Other Values  At this point a third important point should, however, be noted. This is that while  the phenomenon of stranded assets does raise questions of equity this does not  mean that this is the only relevant consideration. It is compatible with recognizing  that there are also other relevant considerations, ones that go beyond the  equitable distribution of fossil fuel use, and that these might, in some  circumstances, take priority.  For example, efficiency matters as well. This can have at least two distinct  implications. First: as was noted at the start, there is a very tight limit on the  volume of greenhouse gases that can be emitted if humanity is to enjoy a 50%  chance of meeting the 2°C target (Collins and Knutti 2013, p.1033) and this  becomes tighter still if we make the aim “to limit the temperature increase to  1.5°C above pre-industrial levels” (Paris Agreement Article 2.1(a)). Meeting this  target will be hard, given increasing per capita consumption, and given an  increasing global population which “is projected to increase by more than one  billion people within the next 15 years, reaching 8.5 billion in 2030, and to  increase further to 9.7 billion in 2050 and 11.2 billion by 2100” (United Nations  Department of Economic and Social Affairs Population Division 2015, p.2).  With this in mind, there is reason to prioritize extracting fossil fuels with the least  warming potential (such as gas) over those which make a larger contribution to  climate change (such as coal). Given the imperative to prevent dangerous  climate change, and given these differences in their impact on the remaining  greenhouse budget, there is a very strong case for favoring extraction of the  energy sources with the least harmful greenhouse gases and for stranding fossil  fuel reserves that are more harmful.  Second, it is vitally important that fossil fuels are extracted in an efficient manner.  Governments and the international community have efficiency-based reasons for  prioritizing projects for extracting fossil fuels that have the most efficient and least  wasteful extraction process.  A concern for efficiency thus requires (other things being equal) both (i)  extracting fossil fuels with the least global warming potential and (ii) for maximally  cost-effective extraction processes.  It is important to recognize that recognizing the importance of efficiency does not  in itself entail that justice does not matter. On most accounts of justice what is  required, among other things, is the efficient protection of vital resources so as to  ensure the highest standard of living possible, and so efficiency (and getting the  most benefit per unit of cost from the remaining stock of fossil fuels that can be  extracted) matters for the realization of justice. It is also crucial to note that  stranding a fossil fuel asset (such as coal) because of its harmful effects and thus  inefficient use of the remaining greenhouse gas budget, might be accompanied  with compensation to such countries for the benefit forgone. So an efficiencybased  reason for keeping a fossil fuel in the ground can be combined with  compensation packages (if, pending the arguments to be considered below, such  compensation is required by justice).  In addition to efficiency, it is vitally important not simply that access to limited  fossil fuels is shared equitably but also that there is an effective policy in place  that can prevent dangerous anthropogenic interference. The final section of this  paper considers the point that focusing on distributive questions has various risks  25 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder  attached to it such as, for example, making an effective international climate  treaty less attainable (Caney 2014).  The upshot here, then, is that the decision to strand some fossil fuel assets and  not others and the decision whether to compensate those with stranded assets or  not does inescapably raise questions of justice and equity. However, there are  other important considerations—most notably the need to prevent dangerous  climate change as well as the need for an efficient use of remaining permissible  fossil fuels. Furthermore, given political realities and the difficulty of persuading  leading countries to engage in the necessary mitigation projects, it cannot be  assumed that we can realize both (i) an effective regime that prevents dangerous  climate change and (ii) does so in a way that shares burdens equitably and treats  those with fossil fuel assets equitably. It may, for example, be the case that  political leaders will commit to sufficiently ambitious climate targets but only in  ways that impose unjust burdens on others, such as adopting mitigation policies  with harmful side effects (Caney 2016).  2. Are these arguments consonant or not with the notion of common but  differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities?  Having established that there are important equity questions surrounding  stranding fossil fuel assets, the next question is whether these can be addressed  from within a framework that calls for a system of common but differentiated  responsibilities and respective capabilities.  A complete answer will emerge in the following section. However, it is possible to  say, in advance of that, that there is no reason to think that the burdens involved  in not extracting fossil fuels (or paying compensation to those required to abstain  from using their fossil fuels) cannot be allocated in accordance with the doctrine  of common but differentiated responsibilities. The doctrine of common but  differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities requires, roughly, that  everyone bears some responsibility but that some should bear a greater burden.  More specifically, the greatest burdens should be borne by the developed  countries; those who have emitted least and who have least ability to pay should  shoulder a lesser burden. Given this, one can realize the doctrine of common but  differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, by granting the poorest  members of the world and those who have emitted the least (often an  overlapping group) with either the greatest access to fossil fuel reserves (or  alternatively compensation for not extracting them).  This addresses Question 1 as specified on page 15. This asked  for “the arguments, both for and against the position that the issue of stranded  assets should incorporate equity considerations” and “whether these arguments  26 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  are consonant or not with the notion of common but differentiated responsibilities  and respective capabilities.”The finding above is that the issue of stranded assets should include equity  considerations, but not only these, and that these arguments are consonant with  the notion of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective  capabilities.  CRITERIA FOR DETERMINING WHICH ASSETS SHOULD BE STRANDED  Having assessed whether the stranding of fossil fuel assets raises questions of  equity, this section turns to the issue of what criteria should be employed to  determine which assets should be stranded and on what basis. What are the  relevant criteria for deciding what is an equitable response to the stranding of  fossil fuel assets? It thus addresses the fourth question posed on page 15,  namely:  “What would likely be entailed in undertaking an assessment which sought to  prioritize the order in which countries should have their assets stranded?”To do so, it considers arguments for and against the following criteria: (a) level of  development, (b) historical responsibility, (c) the extent to which other resources  are available, arguing that each of these is relevant. It then considers the ways in  which (d) the carbon intensity of the economy, (e) climate vulnerability, and (f)  governance structures (for delivery of services) are relevant. More generally,  these criteria are employed here because they are commonly invoked in  academic analyses of climate change policies, and constitute a reasonably  exhaustive set of considerations that might be invoked.Each question will be considered in turn, but we can note, up front, that the  central finding is that an equitable response to the stranding of fossil fuel assets  (one that is informed by the principle of Common but Differentiated  Responsibilities and Respective Capabilities) would be informed primarily by the  state’s (a) level of development as measured by the Human Development Index,  (b) its historical record, and (c) the availability of other resources. The other  criteria mentioned clearly matter, but they should not necessarily guide which  assets should be stranded.  A: HDI and Development  First, one natural criterion to employ when determining who has rights to extract  fossil fuels, and, by how much, is the level of development. The relevance of this  consideration is recognized in the recent Sustainable Development Goals: the  first goal of which calls for the eradication of poverty.43 It is also firmly recognized  in the climate regime. For example, the preamble to the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change (1992) affirms “the legitimate priority  needs of developing countries for the achievement of sustained economic growth  and the eradication of poverty.”44 Crucially, if a policy on stranded fossil fuel  assets is to be in line with the doctrine of Common but Differentiated  Responsibilities and Respective Capabilities, it is essential that excessive  burdens are not placed on the world’s poorest, and that their right to develop in a  sustainable way is recognized. Stranding assets needed for development without  compensation would be in violation of the values and principles affirmed by the  principle of Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and Respective  Capabilities.  In light of this pressing goal, it can be argued that the least advantaged have a  strong claim to extract such remaining fossil fuels that can be used without  triggering a 2°C increase in global mean temperatures. Granting them rights to  extract such fossil fuel reserves can both (i) provide a source of energy for  domestic consumption, but also, crucially, (ii) can generate revenues through  exports.  To this one might add that there are rich fossil fuel reserves in many of the poor  regions of the world. For example, the IEA’s World Energy Outlook 2014 reports  of sub-Saharan Africa that “[t]he region is rich in energy resources, but they are  largely undeveloped. Almost 30% of global oil and gas discoveries made over the  last five years were in the region” (IEA 2014, p.28). There have been “large gas  discoveries in Mozambique (mainly in the offshore Rovuma Basin) and in  Tanzania” which have been “complemented by pre-salt oil and gas discoveries in  the Kwanza Basin in Angola” (IEA 2014, p.462). The IEA adds that in 2013 there  have been “oil finds in the Keta-Togo-Benin Basin in Nigeria and further natural  gas finds in Mozambique” (IEA 2014, p.462).  In short, one might state the argument as follows:   Many live in severe poverty; and any equitable response to existing fossil  fuel resources needs to acknowledge the importance of enabling the poor  to develop [the developmental imperative].   Granting developing countries extraction rights would facilitate  development for two reasons. First, development requires energy (for  agriculture, transportation, health, education, and industry). Coal, oil, and  gas are sources of energy.45 Second, however, and perhaps more  crucially, they can provide a valuable stream of revenue if they are  exported [the role of fossil fuels].  45 These can, of course, be used in ways that have harmful effects on human health. It is worth noting here  that other forms of energy that are very heavily used by the poor – including burning biomass – also have  harmful effects on health. Paul Wilkinson, Kirk Smith, Michael Joffe, Andrew Haines write that “2·4 billion of  the world’s population, disadvantaged by lack of access to clean energy, are exposed to high levels of indoor  air pollutants from the inefficient burning of biomass fuels” (2007, p.965). On the harmful health effects of  current fossil fuel use see Wilkinson et al. (2007, p.967).  29 Oxfam America Research Backgrounder   Therefore, the least advantaged have a special claim to extract existing  fossil fuel reserves (with an upper limit specific by limits imposed by the  2°C target).  The upshot of this argument, then, is that the remaining fossil fuel reserves  should be distributed so as to allow the global poor to extract fossil fuels in their  countries. The proposal would be to allocate rights to extract fossil fuels in  proportion to levels of underdevelopment.  Clearly to put this into practice one would need to have to be able to  operationalize a conception of development. One plausible possibility (mentioned  briefly above) is the Human Development Index. This builds on the “capabilities”  approach developed by Amartya Sen and is employed by the United Nations  Development Program in its “Human Development Reports.”46 The HDI provides  a useful measure of development and as the UNDP’s Human Development  Reports attest, it can be operationalized.  Analysis. Having set out the consideration, we may now consider its strengths  and limitations. One core strength of this approach is its recognition of the  paramount importance of addressing global poverty, and its compatibility with the  doctrine of Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and Respective  Capabilities.  Some aspects of the argument as it stands are vulnerable to criticism and stand  in need of further argument. Four points should be borne in mind.  First: Two reasons were given as to why granting extraction rights to the world’s  least advantaged further development. It is worth noting that the first of these—  the claim that they could benefit from extraction rights by using them for domestic  consumption—is open to question. Energy is crucial for development but this  does not, in itself, necessarily require the use of coal, oil, or gas (Hayward 2007:  Caney 2012a). Other kinds of energy are available—including most notably  renewables—and it would thus be a mistake to infer from the need for energy  that this should be met by fossil fuels. For example, the IEA’s World Energy  Outlook 2014 also reports that sub-Saharan Africa is “endowed with huge  renewable energy resources, especially solar and hydro, as well as wind and  geothermal” (IEA 2014, p.28).47 In addition to this, some countries such as Kenya  and Ethiopia have considerable theothermal potential (IEA 2014 p.473). Other  countries—such as Brazil, China, India, and Turkey—all also have considerable  hydroelectric potential (Yüksel 2009).  This objection does not, of course, undermine the other reason for granting  extraction rights to developing countries, namely that by doing so it provides a  stream of revenue and can thus further development (Bridge and le Billon 2013).  Second: At this point, however, it is worth noting that this second development-based  argument also needs to be handled carefully, for it is unlikely to be the  case that granting extraction rights to fossil fuels to be used for export is  necessary for development. This would assume that there are no other options  for development, and we would need further argument to show whether this is  the case. The conclusion should, thus, be that granting extraction rights provides  one source of revenue for development.  To develop this point further: we should bear in mind that rather than granting  developing countries the extraction rights for remaining fossil fuels, another way  of meeting their development needs would be for those assets to be stranded but  the society be compensated for that. There could, that is, be a system that built  on the underlying rationale that underpinned the Yasuní-ITT Initiative, and sought  to further development, while also keeping fossil fuels in the ground. Clearly,  such a proposal would need to be able to address many practical issues  (including those that led to the failure of the Yasuní-ITT Initiative, such as  ensuring a regular supply of revenue). However, the relevant point in this context  is simply that recognizing the developmental needs of some countries with fossil  fuels does not in itself necessarily entail granting them extraction rights (for  revenues) because an alternative system (stranding plus compensation) could, in  principle, realize the same goal too. Fossil fuel rich developing countries can thus  legitimately make the point that assuming that some remaining fossil fuels can be  extracted, then—other things being equal—they have a strong pro tanto claim to  be entitled either (a) to extract them to further their developmental goals or (b) to  receive suitable compensation and be enabled to develop if their fossil fuel  assets are stranded.  Third: At this point a third point is worth noting, namely that—irrespective of  whether fossil fuel rich developing countries receive extraction rights or whether  their assets are stranded and they receive compensation—it is crucial to ensure  that the benefits are shared equitably (Nuffield Council on Bioethics 2011,  chapter 4, pp.76-77) and that they do not simply go to unaccountable political  and economic élites. It is, of course, a familiar fact that many resource-rich  countries have experienced low development and that benefits have not been  shared equitably. The extensive literature on the “resource curse” and on  managing natural resources effectively and justly is, of course, key here.48 For  the argument from development to be persuasive, then, it needs to show that  granting extraction rights (or financial compensation received as part of an  agreement to strand fossil fuel assets) would actually benefit the needy and  vulnerable, and that the revenues generated would not go to élites.  Fourth: It is important to recognize that the development-based argument for  granting access to fossil fuels could only generate limited rights to extract that  would apply in the short-term but would need to be phased out. Given the volume  of greenhouse gases that may be permissibly emitted (Allen et al. 2009, pp.1163-  1166), it is vital that all countries—including developing countries—transition to a  low-carbon economy.  The verdict: There is an imperative to develop. Given that some countries have  fossil fuel reserves and development needs, there is a case for either allocating  the remaining permissible fossil fuels to developing countries or stranding the  assets but compensating the societies for the benefit foregone. However, other  sources of energy and other ways of promoting development should also be  borne in mind.  B: Historical Responsibility  Having considered one criterion, we turn now to a second. Many ethical analyses  of climate change argue that the ascription of responsibilities to mitigate climate  change should take into account the historical record. Such approaches appeal  to a principle of “historical responsibility,” according to which (roughly stated) past  actions have implications for future rights and responsibilities. A very common  variant of this argument focuses on the use of fossil fuels in the past, arguing that  those who have used the most and thus emitted the most greenhouse gases  have the greatest responsibility to mitigate climate change and fund adaptation  (Neumayer 2000; Shue 2014, pp.182-186; Caney 2005, 2010a).  One question then is whether the underlying kind of reasoning—one that appeals  to the concept of “historical responsibility”—can be applied to the subject of this  report, namely on who can extract the remaining fossil fuels and, if so, to what  extent, and, on what basis. Is it possible to draw lessons about extraction rights  bearing in mind the historical record?  To answer this question, it is worth distinguishing between different  interpretations of the concept of “historical responsibility.” One has been  introduced above. It states:  . The Use Version: The more that an agent (say, a given society) has used  fossil fuels for energy in the past, and thus the more that they emitted  greenhouse gas emissions in the past, then the less that that agent has a  claim to future use (and future emissions); furthermore, by the same  reasoning, the less that an agent has used fossil fuels in the past, and  thus the less that they emitted greenhouse gases in the past, then the  more they have a claim to future use.  This is the conventional principle that is commonly invoked in ethical analyses of  climate change.  In itself this principle does not entail any particular conclusion about extraction  rights. However, with this in mind we might consider two other interpretations of  the concept of historical responsibility that, arguably, do have implications for  extraction rights. Consider, for example,  B. The Extraction Version: The more that an agent (say, a given society) has  extracted fossil fuels in the past the less strong their claim to extract fossil  fuels in the future; and the less that an agent has extracted fossil fuels in  the past the more that they have a claim to extract them in the future.  The rough thought here is that if there is a resource which is limited (either  because it is finite or because it has to be limited to meet a societal goal, in this  case avoiding dangerous climate change) then, other things being equal, those  who have taken most in the past have least claim to take it in the future; and  those who have taken least in the past have the strongest claim to take it in the  future.  Consider too a third principle which is also grounded in the idea of historical  responsibility:  C. The Benefit Version: The more that an agent (say, a given society) has  benefited from the extraction of fossil fuels in the past the less strong their  claim to future benefits from fossil fuels; and, the less that an agent has  benefited from the extraction of fossil fuels in the past the more that they  have a claim to the benefits from the extraction of fossil fuels in the future.  The Extraction Version and the Benefit Version might come to roughly similar  conclusions, but it is worth noting that they are distinct. Some might extract some  resources but others, in addition to those who extracted the principles, might  benefit from them. This might happen in at least three ways. First, later  generations might enjoy benefits from the extraction activities of earlier  generations; second, if a country exports the natural resources then the firms that  purchase them, their shareholders and their employees also benefit, although  they themselves were not involved in the extraction process; finally, consumers  might benefit from the extraction of resources but not be involved in the  extraction process.  Though they are distinct, it is worth noting that, in the context that is the focus of  this paper (namely the equity issues surrounding stranding carbon assets), both  the Extraction Version and the Benefit Version might provide support for the view  that developing countries have a strong claim either to extract existing fossil fuel  reserves or to compensation for not extracting them.  The underlying principle that agents should bear responsibility for their past  actions is an established one. Its application to the policies required to combat  climate change and to the extraction of existing fossil fuel reserves, however,  faces some complications.  First, one response to appeals to historical responsibility is that while the current  generation may legitimately be held responsible for its past actions it is unfair to  make it pay for the actions of previous generations. This is a point often made  against the Use Version. That is, it is often said to be unfair to require current  generations to bear a burden because of the emissions of past generations of  their society.  Someone might argue, in a similar vein, that the Extraction Version is unfair.  Current generations should not be made to bear a burden because past  generations of their society extracted fossil fuels.  A number of different replies can be made to this concern. For example, some  would respond that the agent in question is not an individual but a country. The  argument then is that industrialized countries, like the UK, extracted fossil fuels in  the past and so these countries have a reduced claim now (Caney 2005, pp.758-  759).  Others would respond that the objection has no force at all against the Benefit  Version. They can reply that even though many fossil fuels were extracted by  previous generations and not by current individuals, current individuals (primarily  in affluent countries) have benefited from the emissions of the past and so should  pay. In addition to this, many others—in the developing world—have not so  benefited from past extraction and so are entitled to benefit from the extraction of  remaining fossil fuels.49 The Benefit Version is thus not undermined by the fact  that many fossil fuels were extracted by previous generations since its focus is  not on who extracted (or who used) fossil fuels, but on who benefited from the  extraction of fossil fuels, and current people benefit from the extraction of fossil  fuels which they were not involved in extracting.  A second objection sometimes made against arguments which rely on the  principle of historical responsibility is that it can be unfair to penalize people who  engaged in certain actions in the past if they could not have reasonably known  about the implications of their past actions. This is a point often made in  connection with the use of fossil fuels in the past. The argument is that those who  emitted high volumes of greenhouse gases in the past were often excusably  ignorant of their harmful impacts, and thus it is unreasonable to penalize them for  those consequences. Some might argue in a similar vein that it might be unfair to  deprive people now of rights to extract fossil fuels because, and to the extent  that, they were excusably ignorant of the future implications of their actions. The  thought here would be: If they had known of the future implications then they  might have behaved differently and lowered their use.  This raises a reasonable concern. However, again a number of counterarguments  have been made. In particular, some will argue that whatever force  this has for the Extraction Version, it does not have much force against the  Benefit Version. The point remains that some did in fact benefit and others do so,  and they have benefited considerably from this (whereas others did not); and it  seems unreasonable to ignore this when considering who can extract fossil fuels  in the future. Thus, when some have benefited from the prior extraction of fossil  fuels, it is not unfair to ascribe a burden to them.A third point: Some criticize arguments from historical responsibility, arguing that  people should not be held responsible for either all of the amount of fossil fuels  they have extracted or for all the benefits they have received from the extraction  of fossil fuels in the past. They argue that people should bear a responsibility  only if their extraction of fossil fuels in the past exceeds their “fair share” of what  they can extract, or if their benefits from the past extraction of fossil fuels exceed  a “fair share” of benefits. In both cases this raises the question of what  constitutes a fair share of either (i) extraction rights and (ii) benefits from  extraction in the past. In light of the previous discussion of the right to develop,  one appealing proposal is that people should have a right to develop and should  not be held responsible for actions needed to attain that standard of living, but  they can be held responsible for actions in excess of that. This position adopts a  “poverty-sensitive” principle of historical responsibility (Caney 2010a). If we apply  this to the Extraction Version, the argument would claim that once a society has  extracted over and above what it needs to develop, then any additional extraction  of fossil fuels can be borne in mind; and the more that a society extracts after  that the less, other things being equal, it can claim in the future. Likewise, the  less it extracts after that, the more it can legitimately extract in the future. The  Benefit Version can be reformulated in a similar way. It would state that the more  benefits a society has derived from the extraction of fossil fuels over and above  the attainment of a decent minimum standard of living then the weaker its claim  to extract existing fossil fuels in the future; the less that it has benefited from  extraction in the past, the stronger its claim to extract and benefit from fossil fuels  now and in the future.  A fourth point remains. The analysis above draws attention to two principles that  could be applied to the issue of extractive rights—the Extraction Version and the  Benefit Version. It has also noted that although the two may generally converge  in their conclusions there is no guarantee that they always will. This raises the  question of which is the more plausible and how to decide which should take  priority if they conflict. This raises complex issues. Three considerations are  worth noting:  A. Some will have extracted inefficiently and wastefully in the past. One  worry about the Benefit Version is that if some extracted a resource but  did not benefit greatly from that extraction because they were wasteful,  the Benefit Version would seem to entail that less can be asked of them  than of another society that has been more efficient at deriving benefits  from similar extraction levels. It seems wrong (and to set a bad  precedent) to let their inefficiency or wastefulness mean that they are  entitled to more in the future. If they are responsible for an inefficient  process and so derive fewer benefits than they could have had, then it is  not clear why they should have stronger claims on future resources than  others who have been more efficient in the past.  a. To meet this it would be better to redefine the Benefit Version so  that it holds that those who had the “opportunity to benefit” from  the extraction of fossil fuels and so “could have benefited” from  the extraction have diminished claims in the future in proportion  with that opportunity to benefit (independently of whether they fully  derived the benefit from the extraction process). Otherwise those  who extracted efficiently in the past get penalized (in comparison  with those who extracted inefficiently), and the inefficient are  rewarded for their wastefulness.  B. Second, it is arguable that the more fundamental notion is that of  benefiting. People generally care about opportunities to extract because  of the opportunities to benefit. If a country’s fossil fuel assets are stranded  it seems very plausible to think that their primary concern will be that a  valuable source of benefits has been denied them. Given this, it seems  that what they really care about—what really matters—are the benefits of  extraction.  C. Third, as was noted above, the Benefit Version is not vulnerable to certain  objections made against the Extraction Version. It can more easily explain  why those who live in societies which have in the past extracted fossil  fuels may—other things being equal—have a reduced claim to the  36 Climate change, equity and stranded assets  benefits of the remaining fossil fuel resources even when they themselves  were not involved in the past extraction.  For these reasons, while both matter, and while more could be said about the  merits and demerits of both, the Benefit Version might be more fundamental.  In summary, countries that have either extracted more fossil fuels in the past  (the Extraction Version) or have benefited more from the extraction of fossil fuels  in the past (the Benefit Version) have a weaker claim to the remaining stock of  fossil fuels that may permissibly be used. As a corollary, those countries with  lower historical records of extracting fossil fuels and/or benefiting from the  extraction of fossil fuels have a stronger claim to extract and/or enjoy the benefits  of remaining fossil fuel reserves. Given the third point made above (§3),  however, the historical record is not the only relevant consideration: the level of  development matters too.The first two criteria, thus, play a crucial role in determining who have strong  claims to extract and benefit from existing reserves of coal, oil, and gas—the past  record and the level of development.52 However, certain other criteria might also  be suggested.  C: Available Resources  One of these is whether other resources are available. As was argued above,  fossil fuel reserves have two uses, both of which are relevant for allocating  extraction rights. One use is domestic consumption. A second use, which is  generally recognized to be more significant, is as a good that can be exported  and thus generate revenues.  It is worth noting that, in both cases, the case for granting extraction rights (or for  compensating non-use of fossil fuels) depends to a large extent on whether the  society that has fossil fuel reserves has other resources available.  51 It is worth re-iterating the point that the fact that a given country has a strong claim to develop and  increase its energy consumption does not necessarily translate into a right to extract any existing fossil fuels  in its jurisdiction. It entails a right to develop, but as was noted in the previous subsection this can  sometimes be realized in other ways. So just because a country is not required to bear a heavy burden does  not, in itself, entail that it should use fossil fuels if there are alternatives available that it can employ. It is  important to bear in mind here – and elsewhere when considering claims to use existing coal, oil, and gas  reserves – that what matters is not that people have rights to use certain resources but rather that they  have rights to secure certain interests (in food, water, health, life, and a decent standard of living) (Hayward  2007, Caney 2012).  52 This position is similar in spirit to the Greenhouse Development Rights Approach, pioneered by EcoEquity  and others. In recent work, they have proposed a “Climate Equity Reference Framework” that allocates  responsibilities according to (a) capability to pay (and so people’s level of development) and (b)  responsibility (and so people’s historic emissions). This provides an appealing interpretation of the doctrine  of Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and Respective Capabilities because it ascribes  responsibilities to all, but it also calls for “differentiation” to reflect people’s different levels of emissions in  the past and different levels of development now. One central difference with the approach taken in this  paper, however, is that its focus is on consumption of fossil fuels and the related emissions, whereas the  approach here concerns the extraction of fossil fuels.  Consider first a case where a society extracts fossil fuels and uses them in part  to meet domestic consumption needs. Their claim for this kind of use will depend  on whether they have other sources available that can also serve those same  needs. Say, for example, there are two countries, X and Y, with identical needs,  but where X has more access to clean sources of energy (such as solar  photovoltaic, hydroelectric, geothermal, wind, or tidal) than Y does. In such a  case then, other things being equal, X has a less strong case than Y. Where  there are substitute forms of energy then a person or country’s right to extract  and use energy does not entail a right to serve those needs through the use of  fossil fuels (Caney 2012a).  Consider now, secondly, the case of a country extracting resources for export. A  similar point applies. That is, if a country has other (non-fossil fuel) resources in  addition to fossil fuel reserves that it can export or it has other kinds of goods  which it can trade profitably, then its case for using fossil fuels is accordingly  weaker since it can develop its economy through exporting those other natural  resources or providing other services or skills.  For these two reasons, the strength of claims to use fossil fuels (either for  domestic energy consumption or for export) depends on what other resources a  country has access to (to meet its domestic energy needs or to export to other  countries).  In summary, this section has, thus far, identified three criteria that should inform  policies concerning which assets should be stranded and whether compensation  should be paid to those with assets: (a) their standard of living as reflected in  their HDI, (b) the extent to which they have extracted fossil fuels in the past or  benefited from the extraction of fossil fuels, and (c) whether people have other  ways of meeting developmental needs. The next three subsections briefly  explore three other considerations.  D: Carbon Intensity of the Economy  First, one might consider the carbon intensity of the economy. This measures the  amount of carbon emitted in relation to GDP (Zhang et al. 2013, p.688).“Carbon intensity” thus measures the efficiency of the use of fossil fuels. Many  states seek to reduce the carbon intensity of their production. It might then be  suggested that the stranding of assets should be guided by how efficient a  country is in using its fossil fuel reserves.  Three points can be made in reply. First, the efficient use of fossil fuels is clearly  an important policy objective.54 It also helps advance the cause of justice, for less  wasteful use of scarce resources better enables people to promote their standard  of living. At the same time, however, efficiency is not the only relevant  consideration, and it would be unfair to penalize those who lack efficient  technologies. In addition to this, one response to high carbon intensity might be  not to take that as an immutable fact, but rather to improve it.  Furthermore, and more significantly, when fossil fuels are sold for export the  carbon intensity of the country that is exporting them is not the relevant  consideration: rather it is the efficiency of the importing country. So here  countries with high carbon intensity should not be denied permission to extract  the fossil fuels in their country.  Third, we should recall the discussion of efficiency in the above, where it was  noted that there are strong efficiency-based (and justice-based) reasons for  extracting relatively clean fossil fuels (like gas) over fossil fuels (like coal) which  have a higher global warming potential. One corollary of this might be that where  a developing country has fossil fuel reserves that have a high global warming  potential then there are efficiency-based reasons for stranding such fossil-fuel  assets; but, there may also be justice-based reasons for compensating those  affected for the opportunity forgone (if, say, they are developing or if they have  not extracted them in the past). The policy response to two countries which are  equally poor and have equally low extraction records in the past but one (S1) has  cleaner fossil fuels than the other (S2) might be for S1 to have rights to extract  and for S2 to be denied those but allocated compensation instead for stranding  what would otherwise be a lucrative source of revenue.  E: Climate Vulnerability  Some might propose that vulnerability to the climate system should bear on the  equitable stranding of assets.  In reply: the fact that some countries—particularly developing ones—are highly  vulnerable to climatic changes clearly matters and should be addressed.  However, it can be argued that this is a matter for “adaptation” to climate change  and it is thus not clear why it should bear on a country’s “mitigation”  responsibilities.  Someone might respond to this point by arguing that a country’s exposure to  various harms is important and thus countries need a revenue stream to pay for  the necessary adaptation. However, while this is true it takes us back to the first  consideration (VII.A. HDI and Development) for what it points out is that the level  of development matters and this is already covered by the first consideration.  Societies facing severe challenges like poor infrastructure, poverty, and disease  would be prioritized according to the first criterion: a country’s vulnerability to  climate change is thus subsumed under this and there is no reason to give it  differential treatment.  One complication to this analysis concerns its implications for countries that face  expensive adaptation funds. Compare two countries with such costs. One of  these has succeeded in increasing its Human Development Index, but the other  one which faced similar opportunities has not done so. If we look just to the level  of development, then the first society will receive less assistance here than the  second society, and this seems perverse. It penalizes societies for performing  well and raising their HDI. This will strike many as both unfair in principle and  also as having perverse incentive effects.Two points might be made here. First, this raises an important concern. It entails  that those determining which assets should be stranded (and which of those  should be compensated) should look beyond just the level of development, and  also take into account the opportunities different societies have to develop and  factor that in. Second, however, the point under discussion does not necessarily  entail singling out adaptation costs for climate change as a particular reason to  attribute extraction rights: rather it calls for taking into account the burdens  different societies face (which may include climate-related adaptation costs but  may also include other kinds of burdens too). In short, then, it calls for a use of  human development indices that goes beyond just the level of development  attained and also takes into account the context, the incentive effects and the  opportunities facing societies.  F: Governance Structures  Consider now governance structures. This is clearly vitally important and, as the  extensive literature on the resource curse attests, the kind of political regime in  place plays a major role in determining whether a society benefits from its  ownership of natural resources or not. It is a commonplace notion that many  countries rich in oil, coal, and gas remain poor and prone to conflict. Initiatives on  ensuring transparency and accountable government thus play a vital role (Collier  2007, pp.38-52; Ross 2012; Wenar 2016).Realizing good governance, however, raises several difficult practical and ethical  questions, and several points need to be borne in mind.  First, it is important to be clear about what follows from the importance of  accountable governance structures. The absence of strong accountable  governance structures in place does not in itself entail that a people have a  lesser claim on natural resources (or on compensation for stranded assets). It is  not a reason to penalize the members of those states. Rather it is a reason to  work to reform the governance structures and thereby render them more  transparent and accountable. It would thus be a mistake to take poor governance  as a given and respond to it in a reactive way. The best response is to continue  to work towards transparency and accountability. This is valuable as a goal in  itself. However, it is also valuable as a way of realizing a fair distribution of the  benefits of natural resources within a society and over time.Second, however, it has been argued that fossil fuel revenues may make reform  of governance more difficult, and, it might then be argued, that if this is the case  there is a case for not allocating extraction rights to societies with poor  governance institutions.58 Clearly, a great deal depends here on the empirical  question of the determinants of good governance. In his The Oil Curse, Michael  Ross has argued that petroleum undermines democracy (2012, chapter 3).  Furthermore, in his 2015 paper “What Have We Learnt about the Resource  Curse” he concludes that “the greater a country’s oil income, the less likely it has  been to transit to democracy” (2015, p.243) and that “there is strong evidence  that higher levels of oil wealth help authoritarian regimes, and authoritarian  rulers, ward off democratic pressures” (2015, p.248).  Several further points need, however, to be noted. The first is that Ross also  notes that there are exceptions. He agrees with Thad Dunning’s (2008) argument  that Latin America is an exception to the trend found elsewhere. As Ross writes  of oil-producing states that transition to democracy: “All five of the countries that  made successful transits [to democracy] were in Latin America: Venezuela  (1958), Bolivia (1982), Argentina (1983), Mexico (2000), and Ecuador (2002) …  all of Latin America’s oil producers …are now democracies” (Ross 2012, p.85:  see also pp.85-86). Clearly, then, the relationship is not an iron rule.  Further support for this conclusion can be found in Pauline Jones Luong and  Erika Weinthal’s study of post-Soviet states (Azerbaijan, Kazakhstan, Russia,  Turkmenistan, and Uzbekistan). In Oil Is Not a Curse: Ownership Structure and  Institutions in Soviet Successor States (2010) they find that “even those mineralrich  states that do not inherit strong institutions can nonetheless build them”  (2010, p.4). On their view, the ownership structure—whether there is state  ownership or private ownership—plays a key (and neglected) role.  To all this we should add that Ross notes that whether petroleum has effects on  democracy, corruption, or violence depends on various conditions. As he puts it,  “these effects are conditional” (Ross 2015, p.240). He further notes that the  relationship has not always held. Indeed, he reports that “[f]rom 1960 to 1979, oil  states and nonoil states were equally likely to transition to democracy” (Ross  2015, p.245). The link is thus not set in stone and there remains disagreement  about whether oil stabilizes democracy or not (Ross 2015, p.245).Given this, a case by case approach seems to be called for, and general  statements about oil undermining democracy, while plausible in many cases, do  not always necessarily hold.  In summary, the key considerations from the point of view of equity are (a) the  level of development, (b) the historical record of extraction and benefits from past  extraction, and (c) the availability of other resources60. The three other  considerations analyzed, while important in their own right, do not necessarily  directly bear on the specific question of the equitable response to stranding fossil  fuel assets. The one exception to this is that the efficiency-based criterion give us  reason to distinguish between two countries which are identical in all respects but  one has cleaner fossil fuel reserves than another. Here both have the same claim  to the same standard of living, but in the case of one (where the fossil fuel is  relatively clean) it might be best to permit extraction and in the case of the other  (where the fossil fuel is relatively dirty) it might be best to strand the asset but  provide commensurate compensation.  and treat them as the legitimate owners of the natural resources, or not. On this view, external countries  and corporations enable autocracies to persist by trading with them, and thus the extent to which  undemocratic regimes persist in fossil-fuel rich countries is not fixed and immutable, but depends, in part,  on the behavior of the international community (Pogge 2008, Wenar 2016).  60 Might there be other criteria? In his forthcoming book Justice and Natural Resources (forthcoming), Chris  Armstrong argues that resource rich countries should be compensated if their fossil fuel assets are  stranded. His reasoning is that countries in this position are having to forego an opportunity that would  otherwise have been available to them (Armstrong forthcoming, chapter 10 section V). Two points should  be noted here.  First, implementing a rule that has the effect that an agent must forego certain opportunities to enrich  themselves does not in itself entail that that agent is entitled to receive compensation. To think this  presupposes that the agent has a right to the economic benefits they would have been able to secure if this  rule had not been implemented. It assumes, that is, that we should employ as a moral baseline “the  standard of living that they would have had were it not for the rule” and that we are required to  compensate for departures from that baseline. However, without further argument, it is not clear why we  should accept these assumptions, and assume that agents have such rights. For example, banning the sale  of landmines might reduce someone’s profit margin; but it does not follow that those who would otherwise  make money from selling landmines have a right to compensation. Thus the claim that fossil fuel rich  countries necessarily have a right to compensation because stranding assets reduces the possibility of them  securing benefits is without justification.  A second point: it is worth noting that Armstrong’s claims are plausible in the context of developing  countries. However, this is because such countries have a right to develop (and denying them the extraction  rights without any compensation) compromises this right. Here what is doing the work is the right to  develop. The most plausible version of his argument thus takes us back to the argument from development  considered above.  IMPLICATIONS OF AN EQUITY APPROACH FOR CBDR  Having considered what criteria might guide the stranding of fossil fuel assets,  this section turns to the fifth question specified in this research, namely  “What would be the implications of an equity approach to stranding assets on  the idea of common but differentiated responsibilities and respective  capabilities? Of particular interest is whether such an approach to stranding  assets further explodes the binary classification of developed vs. developing  nations in common but differentiated responsibilities and respective  capabilities.” The upshot of the analysis in the above section is that an equity approach to  stranding assets is extremely likely to result in a differentiation between different  non-Annex I countries and will undermine a simple distinction between  developed and developing countries. The criteria that are morally relevant  ones—from the point of view of justice and equity—come in degrees and so will  not sustain a division between Annex I and non-Annex I countries.  To illustrate the point, consider three criteria that, it was argued, are relevant to  determining an equitable response to the stranding of fossil fuel assets, namely:  1. Development needs and performance in terms of HDI;  2. Historical responsibility in terms of extraction of fossil fuels in the past or  access to benefits from past extraction; and,  3. Access to other sources of energy and to other sources of wealth.  Different countries will differ on all of these dimensions. Consider (1): Countries  will, for example, clearly fall along a spectrum. They will vary in terms of their  current standard of living and the challenges they face.Consider now (2): If—following the argument made above—an equitable  response to climate change requires taking into account either (a) how much  societies have extracted fossil fuels in the past (the Extraction Version) or how  much opportunity benefit they have derived from past extraction (the Benefit  Version), or some combination of both, then clearly different societies will score  differently. So (2) will yield a continuum and there is no guarantee that it will  coincide with (1).  Turning now to (3): Countries will also vary in the extent to which they can  develop without relying on exporting fossil fuels; some, for example, may have  other natural resources or access to markets denied to others.In short, given that the three criteria admit of degrees and given that countries  often perform very differently from each other compared on each of those criteria  a simple distinction between Annex 1 and other countries is hard to defend. This  said, while any strict binary categorization is difficult to sustain it would still, of  course, be possible to group various countries together in rough categories and  there may be an advantage from a political point of view of not abandoning broad  categorizations.  The discussion so far has focused on how an “equity” approach would lead to a  more complex differentiation of responsibilities and undermine the traditional  Annex 1/non-Annex I categorization of Common but Differentiated  Responsibilities and Respective Capacities. One further implication should also  be noted, namely that it could also yield quite different conclusions as to who  bears a responsibility. If for example, a country like Equatorial Guinea is granted  rights to extract its resources (a right denied to some) and if, as a result, it  acquires considerable revenues and scores highly on the HDI then, as a result, it  would acquire some responsibilities.63 To give an example: those countries that have unusually high access to geothermal energy will, other  things being equal, have weaker claims to use any fossil fuels they possess than those that do not. This  bears on the claims of those countries that include East African Rift Valley, since this is “considered one of  the most exciting prospects in the world for geothermal development, with total potential estimated at  between 10 GW and 15 GW – more than East Africa’s total existing power generation capacity, a large share  of which is concentrated in Ethiopia and Kenya” (IEA 2014, p.473).  64 I owe this point, and the examples that follow, to a very helpful comment by an anonymous referee. Note  also that what was earlier termed the Benefit Version might also support further responsibilities on  resource rich countries (and do so more than the Extraction Version). A country like Equatorial Guinea may  have responsibilities to disadvantaged societies that lack resources and thus lack the same opportunity to  derive revenues (like Eritrea or Swaziland). Since these resource-poor societies have not benefited, and  cannot benefit, from extracting resources then others, more fortunate than them in terms of their resource  endowments, might (other things being equal) be under a responsibility to share some of the benefits. The  Extraction Version, by contrast, would entail simply that countries that have historically not exploited their  fossil fuel reserves may do so, but as such it does not directly help improve the condition of poor countries  that lack such resources (like Eritrea or Swaziland).  POLITICAL RISKS  Having identified the equity issues surrounding stranding of fossil fuel assets, this  final section considers problems that seeking to realize equity might encounter.  More specifically it considers the sixth question specified on page 15, namely:  “Would raising questions around equity and stranded assets generate  major political risks to the UNFCCC process?”In reply: there are political risks in pursuing an equitable position on stranding  fossil fuel assets, although the magnitude of these risks will vary depending on  the specific policy pursued and whether developed countries are willing to  exercise leadership. However, there are risks in any equitable position on climate  change (including loss and damage, climate finance, mitigation targets and  adaptation). Three points are worth bearing in mind.  First, if we bear in mind that humanity as a whole may not emit more than half a  trillion tons of carbon if it is to have a 50% chance of not triggering a 2°C world,  and if we also bear in mind that the Paris Agreement aims for an even more  stringent target (Allen et al. 2009, pp.1163-1166; Collins and Knutti 2013, p.1033)  then proposals to allocate the remaining extraction rights to resource-rich  developing countries are likely to encounter some serious political obstacles.  First, some resource-rich developed countries—aware of this and seeking to  avoid dangerous climate change but wishing to utilize their own reserves—will  simply resist plans to allocate extraction rights to the least advantaged.  Alternatively, they might not contest any allocation of extraction rights to the least  advantaged but also will not curb their own extraction of fossil fuels. This would  maintain the flow of fossil fuels and not result in any price increase and thus not  dampen the consumption of fossil fuels. As a result, humanity will exceed the  trillion ton cumulative carbon budget and cause dangerous climate change. It is  notable, in this context, that the Paris Agreement made no further step towards  allocating specific responsibilities and limiting rights to emit greenhouse gases.In addition to this, the USA has consistently resisted attempts to appeal to  principles of historical responsibility.On the other hand, it can be argued that while some resource-rich affluent  countries will resist allocating extraction rights to developing countries they might  be less opposed to policies compensating developing countries for not using  fossil fuels in their own countries. In other words, they might support a proposal  that is similar in spirit to REDD. Building on this, it can be argued that there could  be a system whereby those in developing countries do not develop their fossil  fuels and are compensated financially for doing so where those who pay for the  compensation can include that as part of their contribution to mitigation.  This would help address the problem that faced the Yasuní-ITT Initiative—  namely the lack of sufficient funds. It would also bring it closer in nature to  existing flexibility mechanisms, such as the Clean Development Mechanism,  which is an established feature of the international climate regime. It is also  similar to other forms of paying for environmental services. The CDM is not  unproblematic and there have been some very serious shortcomings and flaws  (Caney 2010c, pp.217-218). However, it is worth considering a policy which  seeks both to mitigate climate change and which does so in ways that further  development. Furthermore, since doing so gives some flexibility to high emitting  countries it might be welcomed by them.  In short, then, while there is a political risk the precedents of the REDD and CDM  suggest that it is not insuperable. A scheme for stranding assets in which those  who abstain from using them receive compensation for that (distributed equitably  among those affected) and in which those who pay for the fund have that  included as part of their mitigation commitments is worth serious consideration as  an equitable and feasible way of addressing climate change in a way that  respects the principle of Common but Differentiated Responsibilities and  Respective Capabilities.  Second, if the policies towards stranding fossil fuel assets adopt the different  criteria analyzed earlier in this paper then, as noted, this will lead to  differentiation between non-Annex I countries. As such, some countries are likely  to resist the fragmentation of Annex I and the unity of the G77. As evidence for  this, it is worth noting that some opposed using Equity Reference Framework  indicators “as a means to differentiate between developing countries” (Ad Hoc  Working Group on the Durban Platform 2013, p.4). To give one important  example, India has objected to the differentiation among non-Annex I countries  that an ERF would entail.68 The point is well-expressed by Navroz Dubash and Lavanya Rajamani in “A Map and a Compass for  Climate Talks,” The Hindu 23 July (2014). They write:  “Indeed, India, with some other like-minded developing countries, has actively rejected an Africa Group  proposal for an “Equity Reference Framework,” which has focused on how burdens may be equitably shared  given differing historical responsibilities, development needs and current capabilities. Operationalising this  framework would require a multilateral assessment of national contributions. India has proven suspicious of  any assessment, even though the use of criteria proposed by the Africa Group can only work in India’s  favour. In the political and legal context of the ongoing negotiations, a rigorous and consequential  multilateral assessment process is the solitary mechanism under discussion that could potentially assess  and perhaps even deliver equity in the distribution of climate burdens as well as adequacy of contributions  by countries in relation to the agreed 2°C temperature goal. India’s rejection of an assessment process  In reply: although breaking down the binary division between developed and  developing countries might encounter some resistance it is not clear how much  longer this binary framework can last in the UNFCCC process. The emergence of  other groupings like BASIC might signal an evolution from the old divisions found  in the Kyoto Protocol.  A third point, as was noted above, although stranding fossil fuel assets  necessarily raises questions of distributive justice those are not the only  considerations. More generally, one can distinguish between two perspectives.One might be called “duty-bearer justice”: this seeks to ensure that the path to a  zero carbon world shares burdens equitably, with due respect to the right to  develop and honoring the principles of common but differentiated responsibility.  The focus of this paper has been on what this might mean in the context of  stranding fossil fuel assets. However, there is a second perspective—what might  be termed “harm-avoidance justice”: this seeks to prevent harm. In this case it  prioritizes preventing dangerous climate change.  Ideally, policies honor both sets of considerations. However, in practice, policy  makers may be forced to strike a balance. It is thus important to adopt a policy to  stranding fossil fuel assets that does not preclude reaching an effective climate  regime that succeeds in avoiding dangerous climatic changes. At the same time,  it is important to ensure that the transition to a safe climate and a zero carbon  world honors duties to the world’s poorest (Caney 2016).  sacrifices an opportunity to operationalise equity and risks allowing developed countries off the hook”  (Dubash and Rajamani 2014).  