The  Climate  Institute  COP 22 — Getting to Zero:  Implementation of Paris Agreement  for Net Zero Emissions    November 2016  The Climate Institute is Australia's leading climate policy and advocacy specialist. Backed primarily through philanthropic funding, the Institute has been making solutions to climate change possible through evidence based advocacy and research, since 2005.  We have bold, ambitious goals and a track record of getting difficult things done through our strategic partnerships as well as our research.  In just over a month the government will start a long awaited review of its climate policies, including its post-2030 emissions reduction targets. This is our chance to choose a different future.  Please support our 2017 Impact Appeal.    Our chance to choose a different future, now.  Summary  Momentum  In August 2015, Australia put forward an initial target of a 26-28 per cent reduction in emissions, below 2005 levels, by 2030. If other countries followed this example, it would lead to warming of 3-4°C above pre-industrial levels.  In December 2015 in Paris, Australia and all countries – rich and poor, large and small – agreed to take action to limit long-term warming to 1.5-2°C, achieve net zero emissions of greenhouse gases and increase resilience to the emerging impacts of climate change.  Australia’s initial target will need to be revisited in  2019-2020, at the latest, as part of the process agreed in Paris that increases ambition towards the central objectives of the Agreement. Achieving these warming goals will require countries like Australia to be at net zero emissions before 2050.  Since Paris, momentum to implement the Paris Agreement – and take other global action to reduce emissions – has been unprecedented (See Timeline).  + On 4 November, the Paris Agreement will enter force within a year of being adopted. This is historic speed for an agreement of this scope. It took the Kyoto Protocol around eight years to come into force.  + Outside the central United Nations (UN) climate change process, Paris sparked momentum for countries to come to separate agreements to reduce emissions from international aviation, and phase down the use of hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), a super-greenhouse gas.  + National governments and investors are responding to the Paris Agreement. For example, the United Kingdom (UK) has agreed to reduce emissions by 57 per cent by 2030 and the Canadian government is imposing a nation wide carbon price floor. In a “landmark” paper published in September, BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager, said investors should incorporate climate change risks into their portfolios.  + Conservative estimates from the International Energy Agency now indicate that world renewable energy capacity now exceeds coal electricity capacity, and renewable output is expected to provide over 60 per cent of total growth in electricity generation to 2021.  Despite this rapid progress, the world is still not on track to achieve the central objectives of the Paris Agreement. Current commitments would led to an estimated 3°C of warming.  Last month’s State of the Climate report from CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology highlighted Australia’s growing, costly, climate impacts with even 1°C of warming since 1910 (see Box 2). Our national interest lies in all countries stepping up, and strengthening, their 2030 and later emissions reductions policies and targets as part of the Paris process (see Key elements of the Paris Agreement).  Defining the rule book  The Paris Agreement set the framework for global action towards achieving net zero emissions. It also outlined what elements of a detailed rulebook for global cooperation were to be defined over the coming few years. These include the transparency of policies to reduce emissions and provide financial support for poor nations, the operation of global carbon markets, and tracking the impact of collective action towards the objectives of the Agreement. By making good progress on these rules, and plans to assist poorer countries facing climate impacts, Marrakech is an important opportunity for governments to ensure that the details of the Paris Agreement can be agreed to by 2018.  Building a net zero emissions future  While the government has declared the Paris Agreement is in our national interest, the long-term implications of the Paris Agreement have yet to sink into Australia’s mainstream political and media discourse, or into domestic policy making.  There are some positive exceptions, Australia has agreed to participate in the international emissions trading mechanism for international aviation and is implementing policies to phase down HFCs in advance of international agreements.  However, overall, policy makers and the media continue to largely focus on the short-term, or at best, just the initial 2030 targets Australia put forward in 2015. This is increasing major transition risks for Australia’s community and economy. For example, recent controversy over renewable energy and energy security has largely failed to recognise Australia’s commitment to the Paris Agreement requires the modernisation and decarbonisation of our electricity system before 2050.  The central commitments governments, including Australia, made in Paris were to limit long-term warming to 1.5-2°C, achieve net zero emissions, and increase resilience to the emerging impacts of climate change.  • In 2015, the Abbott government committed internationally that the 2017 review of climate policies would also consider Australia’s post-2030 target. This review of policies and the post-2030 emissions pathway represents the first chance for a credible national policy conversation in five years, and the first chance for a bipartisan outcomes in almost a decade. It is a critical opportunity to properly integrate climate, energy and economic policy, and fully participate in international climate efforts.  This can be achieved, but will require policymakers to put aside the politics and division of the last few decades and acknowledge we need to face the realities of a net zero emissions world.  Next steps  The immediate next steps for the government should be:  + Ratification of the Paris Agreement in Marrakesh.  + Deliver on its promise to release 2030 emissions projections this year, and do so well before Christmas.  + Ensure the 2017 review, and related COAG energy processes, will consider credible policy to help grow a net zero emissions economy before 2050. This will need to include inclusive social and economic strategies to steadily replace coal fired power stations over the next 15 years.  • Box 1: Australia in the spotlight  On 12 November at Marrakech, Australia will take its turn in what is known as the multilateral assessment process where other countries ask questions of each other. This is an important process to build trust and ambition between countries. Pre-published questions show many other countries – like many Australians – are interested, if not unclear, about Australia’s current climate and energy policy direction. Countries are awaiting key data, like the 2030 emissions projections which it promised in 2016.  • In December last year, the world negotiated and  adopted the historic Paris Agreement on climate  change.1 For the first time, all countries – rich and poor,  large and small – agreed to take universal action to  limit global warming to 1.5-2°C, to achieve net zero  emissions, and to increase resilience to the emerging  impacts of climate change (see Key elements of the  Paris Agreement, page 5).  The first formal meeting of parties to the Paris  Agreement will take place in Marrakech, Morocco from  the 7th to the 14th of November. This brief gives context  to this meeting, outlines key issues that will need to  addressed, and discusses the implications for Australia.  Momentum, momentum, momentum  Momentum to implement the Paris Agreement, and  take other global action to reduce emissions, has been  unprecedented.  In February, over 170 nations, including Australia, signed  the Paris Agreement at a high level ceremony in New  York, an event unprecedented in the history of multilateral  agreements. By October, 87 countries accounting for 6per cent of global emissions had ratified the Agreement.This means the Agreement will enter legal force within  a year of being made. During negotiations it was widely  assumed that it would take until at least 2018 for this to  happen, as historically it can take some time for countries  to ratify international agreements through their domestic  processes.  Box 2: Climate change hits home  in Australia  The most recent State of the Climate report from  CSIRO and the Bureau of Meteorology2 clearly  demonstrates why climate action is in Australia’s  interests. Some key points in that report include:  + Australia has warmed by around 1°C since 1910.  + The number of days per year over 35°C has  increased in recent decades, except in parts of  northern Australia.  + There has been an increase in extreme fire weather,  and a longer fire season, across large parts of  Australia.  + April–October growing season rainfall has reduced  by around 11 per cent since the mid-1990s in the  continental southeast of Australia.  + The overwhelming contribution to the additional  carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is from human  activities, mainly the burning of fossil fuels.  + The atmospheric CO2 increases in 2015 were the  highest ever observed.  In August, The Climate Institute released research  on the implications for Australia of the 1.5°C and 2°C  warming goals in the Paris Agreement.3 That research  indicated warming of 1.5°C would see current extreme  heat waves, droughts and mass coral bleaching  events on the Great Barrier Reef becoming the new  normal. At 2°C, our global climate system would move  from the upper end of present day climate variability  into uncharted territory, resulting in extreme, costly  and dangerous impacts for Australia.  Introduction  Outside the central UN climate change process, Paris sparked momentum for countries to come to an agreement on reducing emissions from international aviation, which will commence in 2021. Over 190 countries, including the world’s two largest emitters, the United States (US) and China, have signed up to limit emissions from international airline travel. Over, 65 countries, including Australia, have agreed to participate in the global emissions trading scheme associated with this agreement.A few weeks later, countries agreed a phase down the use of HFCs, a super-greenhouse gas, to levels that would knock off nearly half a degree of possible future global warming.Financial authorities are also taking note of the Paris Agreement. The G20’s Financial Stability Board in December 2015 announced a taskforce to develop a set of standard climate-related disclosures.7 This financial disclosure framework, which will be released in draft form in December, will be an unprecedented demonstration from the world’s biggest financial authorities that climate change has considerable implications for markets and investors which need to be understood and disclosed to minimise risks the global financial system.  From words to action  The impact of the Paris Agreement has been felt outside formal multilateral governmental processes.  Investors are increasingly incorporating carbon and climate change risks into the decisions they make. Norway’s oil fund, the world’s largest sovereign wealth fund, has ceased investing in 52 companies that are heavily reliant on thermal coal.In a “landmark” paper published in September, BlackRock, the world’s largest asset manager, said investors should incorporate climate change risks into their portfolios.9 BlackRock manages assets with a value around five times the size of the Australian economy.  National governments are also responding. For example, the UK, even after the Brexit referendum, has agreed to reduce emissions by 57 per cent by 203010 and the Canadian government is imposing a nationwide carbon price floor (See Timeline, page 6).Global investments, technology innovation and cost reductions continue in clean energy. In 2015, for the first time, renewable energy overtook coal in terms of cumulative installed capacity around the world.12 Conservative estimates from the International Energy Agency now indicated that world renewable energy output is expected to provide over 60 per cent of total electricity generation growth to 2021.  More work to do  Despite this rapid progress, the world is not on track to achieve the objectives of the Paris Agreement. Countries current commitments would see the world warm by around 3°C.13 Although this is better than the 4-6°C degrees of warming projected prior to the Paris talks, the world is still well above the objectives of the agreement to limit long-term warming to 1.5-2°C.  This highlights the importance of countries stepping up their 2030 emissions reductions targets as part of the Paris process in 2019-2020. This is particularly relevant to Australia, whose current 2030 target is consistent with global warming of 3-4°C and would leave us as  one of the highest per capita emitters in the G20 in 2030 (Figure 1).In December 2015, Australia and all countries agreed to take action to to limit long-term warming to 1.5-2°C, achieve net zero emissions and increase resilience to the emerging impacts of climate change. Countries submitted first post-2020 emissions reduction targets (NDCs) to either 2025 or 2030.1ST GLOBAL STOCKTAKEParis established a system whereby every five years countries collectively take stock on the world’s progress towards achieving the objectives of the Agreement.2ND GLOBAL STOCKTAKE3RD GLOBAL STOCKTAKE4TH GLOBAL STOCKTAKEPARIS AGREEMENT ENTERS INTO FORCEOn 4 November, the Paris Agreement will enter force within a year of being adopted. This is historic speed for an agreement of this scope. It took the Kyoto Protocol around eight years to come into force.BY 2030Countries put forward a stronger target than their previous one.Every five years after this countries will need to advance even stronger targets until net zero emissions is achieved.BY 2020Countries with 2025 targets submit their 2030 target and countries with 2030 targets update their target.Countries are also asked to submit 2050 targets that are in line with the objectives of the Paris Agreements by 2020.BY 2025Countries put forward a post-2030 target stronger then their 2030 target and justify it against the objectives of the Paris Agreement.NET ZEROEMISSIONS2017 REVIEW OF CLIMATE POLICIESThis review of Australia’s climate policies and the post-2030 emissions pathway represents the first chance for a credible national policy conversation in five years.  Key elements of the Paris Agreement    Chinese government outlines sectors which will be covered by its national emissions trading scheme set to start in 2017, sectors such as electricity, steel and other major manufacturers, oil and gas production and aviation.  The Washington DC appeals court rules against delaying the implementation of the US government's  Clean Power Plan.  Californian insurance commissioner calls for insurers to divest from coal.  US Supreme Court grants a stay of implementation for the US Clean Power Plan.  China’s National Energy Administration announces it will restrain the construction of new coal-burning power plants and withdraw some existing approvals and shut down over 1,000 coal mines in 2016.  On the back of industry pressure, Kazakhstan decides to suspend its emissions trading scheme until 2018.  The Canadian state of Ontario releases draft regulations to establish an emission trading scheme.  Russia says it will strengthen its 2030 target.  New Zealand announces it will phase out its 2-for-1 carbon permit subsidy from January 2017.  Canada's Ontario passes legislation establishing its emissions trading scheme.  China brings manufacturer-owned power plants into its planned national ETS.  India announces plans to close coal plants aged 25 years old and over, saying they will be replaced by supercritical coal stations.  The US expands methane-reducing regulations for gas extraction to the oil industry.  Marrakech  climate  negotiations.  China and US announces that both countries will seek to ratify the Paris Agreement this year.  UK announces it will commit to achieving net zero emissions and enshrine the pledge into law.  US and Canada agree to cooperative action for taking steps to implement the Paris Agreement.  China releases its 13th five-year plan and sets a target to cut the carbon intensity of its economy to 18 per cent below current levels by 2020.  Canada agree to introduce nationwide carbon pricing mechanism/s.  Dutch National Bank calls for transition to carbon-neutral economy.  Canada, the US and Mexico jointly commit to achieve 50 per cent clean energy by 2025.  South Africa publishes draft regulations on the country’s proposed carbon tax.  The Norwegian Parliament commits to net zero emissions by 2030.  India and US commit to ratify the Paris Agreement and cooperate on climate change.  India cancels plans for coal stations totalling 16GW of capacity.  South Korea considers closing coal stations over 40 years old, to improve air quality.  SEC seeks comment on whether greenhouse gas emissions should be included in mining sector disclosure requirements.  France announces intention to tax coal-fired power generation.  China announces that a formal ban on new coal-fired power stations will be part of the 13th Five Year Plan’s energy policy.  South Korea announces plans to close 10 coal stations by 2025 and an increase in its renewable energy target to 7 per cent by 2020.  Countries agree to establish a global emissions trading scheme for international aviation.  190+ governments, reach agreement to phase down HFCs  Canada announces it will impose mandatory carbon pricing on provinces that do not adopt a carbon price themselves.  China announces it will stop the construction of coal-fired power plants in 15 regions.  BHP updates climate portfolio analysis after less than  12 months to allow for faster growth in EVs and solar.  Mexico announces it will develop a pilot emissions trading scheme with a view to implementing it nationally in 2018.  Investor groups representing  $13 trillion press  for G20 nations to ratify Paris agreement.  Ontario and Quebec, Canada, strike a deal with Mexico to cooperate on carbon trading.  California commits to cutting emissions to at least 40 per cent below 1990 levels by 2030.  Germany publishes its plan on how the country will meet its goal of cutting emissions by 80-95 per cent by mid-century.  SEC is reportedly to be probing Exxon's reporting of reserves and climate-risks.  Mark Carney's speech on climate change: Paris "greatly increases transition risks as well as opportunities".  BlackRock publishes "landmark" paper saying investors should adapt to climate change risks and outlining ways of doing so.  177 countries sign Paris Agreement,  12 countries deposit instruments of ratification and a further 22 countries commit to ratifying the Agreement in 2016.  China suspends coal station approvals across areas with surplus power capacity - 28 of its 31 mainland provinces.  • Sorting out the rulebook  The Paris Agreement set the framework for global action towards achieving net zero emissions but did not decide the detailed rulebook for global cooperation (see Box 3).  In Paris, the expectation was that it would take until around 2018 for this to be completed. The very rapid entry into force of the agreement has created a sense of urgency to define the rules, and also created a number of procedural challenges. This is because the first formal meeting of the parties to the Paris Agreement will take place after the treaty becomes international law, and many of the detailed rules for the implementation of the agreement are yet to be agreed as countries have not had time to finalise them. This is the backdrop to Marrakech.  The situation is more complicated by the fact that, formally, only those countries that have ratified the agreement can be involved in decision making. To date, 86 of the 197 parties to the convention will have ratified. The government has stated that ratifying the agreement is in our national interest and will be in a position to do so by the end of the year.  Key issues at Marrakech  As a result, the initial days of Marrakech are likely to focus on two core issues:  1 Establishing a formal process to allow negotiations on the rulebook to continue so they can be agreed upon at a future meeting in, say, 2018. This could be done, for example, by extending for first formal meeting of the Paris Agreement beyond Marrakech and establishing a deadline to conclude negotiations in 2018.  2 Establishing an inclusive process that will allow countries who have not yet ratified the agreement to participate in decision making. Excluding, the 110 countries who have, in many cases for good reasons, not yet finalised their domestic legal processes of ratification would be very damaging to the development of the agreement and future participation by these countries.  In addition to the detailed negotiations of rules, Marrakesh will also host a Ministerial forum which will celebrate entry into force of the agreement. It will also discuss progress on scaling up financial and other support for poor nations, and the progress being made on addressing Loss and Damage.• Box 3: Defining the Paris Agreement rulebook  Marrakech is a crucial opportunity for governments to step up the pace of negotiations to define the elements of the detailed rulebook for global cooperation. Below are examples of the detailed rules that were to be drafted before the first meeting of the Paris Agreement. Assuming the procedural issues outlined above are resolved, these will be some of the key issues that countries will negotiate in Marrakech:  + Clarity on emissions targets: Before Paris, countries broadly outlined what nations should report to the international community when they submit their emissions reductions targets. For example, countries are expected to outline how their target is consistent with the objectives of international agreements (i.e. limiting warming to the less than 2°C). When countries advanced their post-2020 emissions targets many nations did this but others, like Australia, did not. In Paris, it was agreed that more detailed rules would be developed on what countries should and should not report when they advance emissions targets.  + Transparency of national actions, emissions and progress toward achieving targets: The Paris Agreement builds on the current framework which sees countries report on their emissions and actions to meet targets every two years. Paris established a single framework that applies to all nations, and the detailed rules for transparency were to be developed by the first meeting of the agreement.  + Rules for scaling up and ensuring there is transparency around financial and other support to developing countries for adaptation and net zero emissions development: Scaling up financial and other support (e.g. capacity building, technology transfer) to poor nations so they can adapt to emerging climate change impacts, and align with a net zero emissions pathway, are central elements of the Paris Agreement. Rules and procedures for these issues are to be developed.  + Global stocktakes: Paris established a system whereby every five years countries collectively take stock of the world’s progress towards achieving the objectives of the Agreement. By the first meeting of the Paris Agreement, sources of scientific inputs, how to measure the overall effectiveness of national emissions targets and other technical rules and procedures were to be drafted.  + International emissions trading: The use of carbon pricing and markets continues to grow at a national level. In Paris, it was agreed that a mechanism would be developed to allow nations to meet their targets through international emissions trading. For example, if one country is overachieving its target it could trade excess credits to another country to help it meet its target. Again, by the first meeting of the Paris Agreement detailed rules for this new global market mechanism were to have been drafted.  • In some respects, given the nature of the current political debate on climate and energy policy in Australia, one could be forgiven for thinking the Paris Agreement does not exist. The government has stated that the Agreement is in Australia’s national interest,16 but the long-term implications of the Agreement have yet to sink into mainstream political and media discourse, and domestic policy making.  For example, the government has signed and is expected to soon ratify the treaty which aims to accelerate action towards net zero emissions. However, discussions around energy and climate policy have a tendency, at best, to only focus on what is needed to achieve the government’s current, inadequate 2030 target.Implementing the Paris Agreement  Australia is yet to ratify the Agreement. The government is observing the normal process for excepting international treaties through the parliamentary Joint Standing Committee on Treaties. At the outset of that process Ministers Bishop and Frydenberg stated that the Agreement is in Australia’s national interest. Australia should be in position to ratify the Agreement during the Marrakech meeting as our domestic process should have been completed.  In line with the decisions made in Paris, the government must reconsider and resubmit its 2030 target by 2019-2020 at the latest. It is worth noting in this context that the ALP have committed to at least a 45 percent reduction on 2005 levels by 2030. Regardless of whether at this time it puts forward a more credible 2030 target consistent with the objectives of the Paris Agreement, in 2024 it will need to put forward a stronger post-2030 target. And every five years after this Australia will need to advance an even stronger target until we achieve net zero emissions.  Decisions in Paris also ask governments to submit 2050 targets that are in line with the objectives of the agreements by 2020. The Abbott government committed internationally to consider its post-2030 emissions pathway in its 2017 policy review.18 Other countries, including the US, are developing 2050 plans to help guide long-term planning and decision making by investors and the community (Box 4).  Implications for Australia  Box 4: Defining long-term  emissions pathways  In 2015, the Abbott government committed internationally to “consider a potential long-term emissions reduction goal for Australia, beyond 2030”. In addition, under the decisions made in Paris, countries have been invited to define long-term emissions strategies to 2050 that take into account the objectives of the agreement (limiting warming to 1.5-2°C and net zero emissions). Many countries already have long-term targets, and countries like the US, Canada and Mexico have committed to do so by the end of this year.  Long-term targets matter because:  1 Private sector investment signals: A credible international commitment to reduce emissions to a certain level over the long-term provides an important signal for long-term investment decisions. This in turn enhances the ability of companies and investors to develop strategies that deal with the risks and opportunities associated with the transition to net zero emissions. This is particularly the case for infrastructure with long lifespans, which risk becoming stranded if the need to achieve net zero emissions is not considered in investment decisions.  2 Signals to market regulators: A long-term signal would aid the efficient functioning of public sector organisations with governance responsibilities across Australia’s electricity, financial and other markets and systems. It helps ensure that they are taking into account long-term objectives as they exercise any oversight, planning or regulatory responsibilities.  3 International diplomacy: Australia has made an international commitment to examine its post-2030 emissions pathway as part of the 2017 review. Backsliding on this commitment would harm Australia’s interests in areas within the negotiations it is seeking to advance. Australia cannot avoid international pressure to define a 2050 emissions pathway. Other countries will update and define their 2050 targets over the next few years and if Australia joins these countries it will also increase pressure on major emerging economies, such as China and India, to define their long-term  By just focusing on the short-term, policy makers and  the media risk building major community and economic  transition risks into the outcomes of decision making.  For example, the electricity sector is Australia’s largest  source of emissions and is key to reducing emissions  in other sectors (e.g. electric vehicles and buildings  based on clean electricity). It is also undergoing a  major transformation driven by domestic and global  technology trends. Limited action to accelerate and  manage the transformation to a decarbonised electricity  sector over the short-term means the sector would need  to undergo very rapid and disruptive changes later on to  ensure Australia acts in line the objectives of the  Paris Agreement.  Figure 2, illustrates this based on modelling for The  Climate Institute19 and, separately, for the Climate  Change Authority.20 Under all scenarios that are  consistent with limiting global warming to less than 2°C,  Australia’s existing coal fired generators need to be  replaced with clean energy over the next 15-20 years.  The pathway to achieve this matters. Delaying credible  action to manage this transition would mean that nearly  all of the existing generation fleet would need to be  replaced in five years to be consist with the objectives  of the Paris Agreement. This would be devastating to  local communities and risk major shocks to electricity  markets and prices.  FIGURE 2  Coal generation capacity under The Climate Institute (TCI) and Climate Change Authority’s (CCA) commissioned modelling of the  electricity sector under less than 2°C scenarios. The current national target scenario is consistent with the electricity sector reducing  emissions by a similar amount as the national target. TCI – Clean in Coal out and CCA – Emissions intensity mimic the current policy  frameworks proposed by the TCI and CCA respectively. A broader range of other scenarios based on different policy frameworks and  other assumptions is shown for completeness.  2017: A chance for credible climate policies consistent with the Paris Agreement  The government’s promised 2017 review of climate policies and consideration of post-2030 emissions targets, represents the first chance for a credible national policy conversation in five years. It will be an important opportunity to integrate climate, energy and economic policy.  This review could deliver a suite of credible, bipartisan supported, long-term policies at the federal level. These can be fair and inclusive to communities impacted by the inevitable transition to clean energy, and can minimise unnecessary costs to business.  The Climate Institute’s National Agenda for Climate Action provides a comprehensive roadmap for achieving these outcomes across three inter-related policy dimensions:  1 setting a credible emissions pathway to net zero emissions  2 ensuring investor, business and community confidence in clean energy; and  3 integrating climate costs and opportunities into mainstream decision-making.  The Australian Climate Roundtable – which comprises the Australian Aluminium Council, the Australian Conservation Foundation, the Australian Council of Social Services, the Australian Council of Trade Unions, the Australian Energy Council, the Australian Industry Group, the Business Council of Australia, the Investor Group on Climate Change, The Climate Institute and WWF Australia – has also published climate policy principles which address the goals of climate policy and the characteristics of policies to meet the goals.25 The Australian Climate Roundtable has concluded that the most serious and immediate barrier to Australia’s successful transition is not the technical or economic challenges involved – substantial though they are – it is the absence of broad political agreement on a scalable approach to climate and energy policy.This can be achieved, but will require policymakers to put aside the politics and division of the last few decades and acknowledge we need to face the realities of a net zero emissions world.  Next steps  The immediate next steps for the government should be:  + Ratification of the Paris Agreement in Marrakech.  + Deliver on its promise to release 2030 emissions projections this year, and do so well before Christmas.  + Ensure the 2017 review, and related COAG energy processes, will consider credible policy to help grow a net zero emissions economy before 2050. This will need to include inclusive social and economic strategies to steadily replace coal fired power stations over the next 15 years.  Box 5: Australia in the spotlight  Australia will answer direct questions from countries on its progress to reduce emissions on the 12th of November at Marrakech. This “Multilateral Assessment” process was established to review 2020 emissions reductions targets.This process aims to transparently compare the efforts of developed countries, and track the impact of the actions they are taking. This process is the precursor to what will apply to all countries under the Paris Agreement after 2020. While possibly uncomfortable for nations when put under the spotlight, this process can help ensure that countries meet their commitments and avoid international criticism.  As part of this process other countries including the US, China and Brazil have already raised questions around the transparency of Australia’s reporting on the impact of policy decisions on Australia’s emissions projections, and have asked when Australia’s 2030 projections will be released.22 Additionally, the expert review of the report Australia provided to the international community on progress towards its targets raised similar questions. The review stated that in many instances the government has not been transparent with the international community on the impact of its domestic policies.For over two decades, one of Australia’s priorities for the international framework has been to ensure it promotes transparency and accountability on all countries to do what they say they will. Australia will be better placed to encourage greater transparency from other countries if it is being transparent on its own emissions and projections. For example, the Australian government should deliver on its promise to the international community to release the latest 2030 emissions projections in 2016. This should not be done on Christmas Eve as the government has done in the past for other emissions reports.