 Tuesday, July 7, 2009 511 mots

Key polluters focus on climate action
By Fiona Harvey

Representatives of the world's 16 largest greenhouse gas emitters held an emergency meeting on Tuesday to try to salvage backing for a strong statement on climate change at this week's Group of Eight meeting in Italy.

Signals that China and India would not sign up to headline emissions reductions led the US on Friday to call the closed-doors meeting in Rome.

It aims to smooth the passage of a key climate change debate tomorrow at L'Aquila, at which eight countries will join the G8 industrialised nations, including China, India, Mexico and Brazil. The European Union also participates as a member of the G8, as does Denmark which hosts a key conference in December aimed at forging a successor to the Kyoto protocol.

Barack Obama, the US president, called together the leaders of the world's biggest emitters for the first time in a bid to revive sluggish progress in global warming negotiations.

The 16 countries in the Major Economies Forum, which was begun under former US president George W. Bush, produce 80 per cent of the world's carbon emissions.

A key issue at the MEF, which will be co-chaired by Mr Obama and Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian prime minister, will be whether to include a formal commitment to hold global warming to no more than 2 degrees above pre-industrial levels, which scientists regard as the limit of safety.

If agreed by the MEF, it would be the first time such a commitment has been formally adopted by an international forum.

But the commitment was in doubt on Tuesday as China sought to achieve additional concessions on funding for poor nations to cut emissions and adapt to climate change, and for more of the burden of emissions cuts by 2020 to be taken up by rich countries.

"The G8 must agree more investment for the developing world and stronger mid-term targets on CO2 to get China's backing," said Tobias Muenchmeyer of Greenpeace. "They must show leadership."

The debate at L'Aquila is intended to give momentum to the separate United Nations negotiations under way to update the Kyoto protocol, which culminate at Copenhagen. The original Kyoto deal required rich countries but not poor nations to cut emissions, and was never ratified by the US.

The idea behind the MEF is to provide an alternative to the UN, in which progress is slow because 192 countries must be included in discussions.

"If we don't get anything on climate change from the G8 and the MEF, then we will really have a problem at Copenhagen," said one EU diplomat who declined to be named.

Last year's G8 summit displayed a clear rift between developed and developing countries. The rich nations committed to cut global emissions by 50 per cent by 2050. But the so-called "plus five" nations - China, India, Brazil, Mexico and South Africa - called on them to make cuts of more than 80 per cent to allow developing countries to increase their emissions.

One of the main achievements of the MEF is to bring together heads of government. The UN talks involve environment ministers, who often lack the authority to make significant concessions. The White House hopes that if leaders meet face to face, they may establish common ground that will help give their ministers more freedom to negotiate.

Connie Hedegaard, climate and energy minister for Denmark, said: "[The negotiators] have been sitting opposite each other for years arguing from the same positions. That is why it is so crucial that the leaders say [forging an agreement in Copenhagen] is what they want to do. That will let [the negotiators] depart from here."

Mr Obama heads to Italy armed with the passage of cap-and-trade legislation through the US House of Representatives. Although the vote was narrow, the move towards a federal carbon-cutting regime signals the US is serious about tackling climate change.

Jonathan Lash, president of the World Resources Institute, said: "The problem that we face with the negotiations is not scientific or technical, but political."
