Friends of the Earth's Annual Review 2009-2010
taking the green path



Welcome to our annual review for 2009-2010. It's been another remarkable year for Friends of the Earth, one that makes me proud to be part of this fantastic organisation.
Over the past 12 months we have achieved many things, and continue to make significant progress in preventing biodiversity loss and addressing climate change. This would not have been possible without your generous support.
Thanks to you, for example, renewable energy has made a big shift towards the mainstream, with homes and businesses now paid to produce their own electricity (page 14).

Thanks to you, we have made tremendous headway with limiting the amount of emissions from each local authority (page 4).
And because of your backing, the Government now acknowledges that action is needed to make livestock production more sustainable (page 8).
A major landmark was the climate summit in Copenhagen. It's no secret that this resulted in a disappointing Accord (page 6). But as someone who has been to several such conferences in the past, I know that we achieved a lot in the Danish capital.
As a result of us standing shoulder to shoulder with developing countries, their concerns have now shot up the international agenda. At Copenhagen, we campaigned for adequate finance for poorer countries to meet the challenge of climate change, and used our research to prove the recklessness of offsetting and carbon trading. Because of our campaigning, these issues are now on the negotiating table and key elements in the ongoing talks. Thanks to your support, any future climate agreement will be the better for what we did at Copenhagen.

The green path to a better future The following pages are a journey through many of the elements of our work, highlighting the impact we're making and what we've achieved on the way. I hope they give you a flavour of how our campaigns work together and an insight into how we work ­ from an idea, to political backing; from local activism, to widespread public support and media awareness.
You'll see that we value our independence and base our solutions on the latest science and research. And you'll read about the things that make us a truly unique organisation, such as our effectiveness at both grassroots and international levels, and our legal support to communities that are trying to protect their environment.
A new Government This is the first time we've had a change of Government since 1997. One challenge has been to convince it that even at a time of unprecedented public spending cuts, the environment remains a priority. On this front, we've had great results. For example, we have persuaded the Coalition to keep its commitment to a Renewable Heat Incentive (page 14) and create a Green Investment Bank (page 15).
And we continue to have respect in the corridors of power ­ so much so that Parliamentarians named us the UK's Best Environmental Campaigning Charity 2009.

What next? With the challenging economic circumstances, there's no doubt the year ahead is going to be tough for all sectors. In anticipation of this, we launched an urgent appeal ­ and the response has been fantastic. Thank you so much for your support, which will go a long way towards ensuring we can press ahead as planned with our campaigns.
The downturn, however, can be seen as an opportunity to rethink economics. Friends of the Earth will encourage investment in energy saving, renewables and other low-carbon technologies. This way the UK will not only begin to meet the challenge of climate change, but create hundreds of thousands of jobs and a thriving economy.
There are some big opportunities to make progress for the environment over the coming year. We'll be pressing for local carbon budgets to become law in the forthcoming Energy Bill, and for tough insulation standards in rented homes. Our research shows the latter will not only lift millions out of fuel poverty, but will cut carbon emissions and save a fortune in treating illnesses associated with poor housing (page 12 ).
David Cameron has said he wants this Government to be the greenest ever. With your support in 2011, we will show them the way ­ and continue to build momentum for a greener, fairer planet.
Climate change

Balthazar Serreau

The world has already warmed by 1 degree since the Industrial Revolution. Beyond 2 degrees there is a far greater chance we will trigger runaway global warming. Friends of the Earth aims to stop average temperatures exceeding this figure by pushing for a strong and fair international agreement to slash carbon dioxide emissions ­ and securing action here in the UK.
cutting carbon locally

Get serious about co2 Councils have a big say in UK climate emissions ­ from how we heat and power our homes to how we get around. Our campaign aims to persuade councils to commit to cuts in carbon dioxide emissions of at least 40 per cent by 2020, in line with what scientists say is necessary.
More than 70 Friends of the Earth local volunteer groups have been gathering public support to inspire their councils to act.
We've shown how simple measures to drive down emissions will benefit people's lives. These include better insulation in our homes and businesses, which will cut energy bills, and better public transport and schemes to encourage walking and cycling.

We've been building alliances with a range of organisations including the National Federation of Women's Institutes, the Trades Union Congress, the Federation of Small Businesses and Unison.
More than 5 million people in England are now covered by strong local targets to cut CO2 emissions. Influential councils leading the way include Brighton, Bristol, Haringey, Manchester and York.
Momentum is building and in 2011 we will focus on the introduction of a nationwide scheme of local carbon budgets, to limit the amount of carbon each council can emit. This will ensure emissions come down steeply in every single local authority area, not just the ones already signed up to targets.

"Working with Friends of the Earth is a very natural thing. It's about grassroots campaigning, ordinary people putting pressure on politicians like me to do the right thing for the environment"
Neil Harrison, Councillor, Bristol

Spreading the message Friends of the Earth has an impressive track record of campaigning on climate change. Most recently we secured the introduction of the Climate Change Act of 2008, a world first that commits the UK to legally binding cuts in greenhouse gases.
Such is its impact that other countries want to follow our lead and introduce their own legislation.

This year we delivered seminars with the Foreign and Commonwealth Office and the Department of Energy and Climate Change to promote the Act across Europe. This is helping to generate support for climate legislation, and complements the campaigns of our sister groups in Europe. New laws are expected to be agreed in 2011 in Austria, Belgium, the Czech Republic, Denmark and Ireland.

Councils can influence up to 80 per cent of carbon emissions in their area ­ they could slash emissions by insulating homes and businesses, encouraging better public transport and installing renewable energy.

How we're making a difference
In Leeds ­ as in many areas around the country ­ we have been campaigning for the council to commit to big emissions reduction targets. The campaign included packed public screenings of the climate change film, The Age of Stupid, attended by councillors and business leaders. Clearly the message hit home, as Leeds City Council passed a motion to reduce emissions by at least 40 per cent by 2020. We and other groups are now working closely with them to develop a climate change strategy. Among the proposals are a £30 million scheme to roll out energy-efficiency measures in homes across the city.

Simon Hulme


Climate change

Scientists say warming global temperatures could lead to more extreme weather, such as severe flooding. This will hit the poorest people hardest.

Rosie Hallam

copenhagen and the bigger picture

international action Climate change needs action on the world stage as well as at home, and Friends of the Earth is campaigning for a strong and fair global agreement on tackling greenhouse gas emissions.
In 2009 our international work focused on the climate talks in Copenhagen, Denmark, reflecting huge expectations from both the public and politicians.
We sent a small group of experts to the Danish capital as part of the Friends of the Earth International delegation. Hundreds of UK supporters went too, joining others from our 77 member groups for a peaceful demonstration through the city.
Those two weeks in December showed Friends of the Earth at its best, with supporters, volunteers and staff working together. Our strategy was to apply pressure to achieve a meaningful agreement, and head off compromises by a combination of advocacy, support for developing countries, public pressure and media work.

Campaigning Our campaigners inside the talks often worked late into the night, monitoring every development. It meant we could respond quickly to emerging information and feed back into the talks via contacts in delegations.
We stood shoulder to shoulder with developing countries, sharing information with them, organising press conferences and media briefings to make sure their concerns were heard by more powerful states and the general public.
We reported what was happening on the inside track at the conference via a regular blog on our website.
Legal expertise Our team included lawyers who analysed draft agreements as they emerged. This exposed false solutions and loopholes in emissions targets, alerted negotiators to amendments that were needed, and helped build momentum for a strong and fair agreement at the talks.

activism We supported events promoting alternative solutions to the climate crisis, and organised debates with leading international thinkers. Back in the UK, staff worked with our team in Copenhagen to mobilise over 1,000 people to take critical actions every day of the talks, such as emailing influential countries to persuade them to change their positions.
impact Our work in Copenhagen has helped make poorer countries and the billions of people most affected by climate change a key issue in ongoing climate negotiations. We were the leading critical voice on carbon trading, whereby rights to emit carbon dioxide are bought and sold. And we exposed the failings of offsetting, where rich countries pay for low-carbon projects in poorer countries instead of tackling their own emissions. As a result both issues are now central to negotiations and will have to be resolved for real progress to be made.

6

beyond copenhagen Despite the high expectations, the Copenhagen negotiations produced a hugely disappointing voluntary Accord that offers insufficient emissions cuts and inadequate finance for tackling climate change and its effects.
Throughout 2010, however, we continued to be a major presence at climate talks around the world, including Bonn, Germany, and Cancun, Mexico.
We supported Friends of the Earth International at the Cochabamba People's Summit on Climate Change, held in Bolivia. This brought together 35,000 people ­ including official delegations from 47 countries, representatives of people affected by climate change, scientists and campaign groups ­ to formulate the

developing world's response to the Copenhagen Accord.
Following the summit, Friends of the Earth was invited to join a private meeting with UN Secretary General Ban Ki-moon to help present the findings. This was unprecedented and is a measure of the influence Friends of the Earth has on the global stage.
Our campaigning in Cancun further highlighted the need for emissions cuts consistent with the science, and for more money for developing countries to tackle climate change. The outcome of the talks, though weak, has kept the UN process alive and is something to build on. We will continue to push hard for a strong and fair agreement as we head towards the next major UN summit in South Africa, at the end of 2011.

"As a mother I feel it's important to provide a world which is safe and stable for all children to grow up in. We need world leaders to take action now to prevent climate catastrophe"
Helen Baxendale, actor and filmmaker, on why she joined Friends of the Earth in Copenhagen

Friends of the Earth

People power
45,000 signed our petition to world leaders, calling for a strong and fair agreement on climate change. 40,000 attended the UK's biggest ever climate march, organised by Friends of the Earth and other members of the Stop Climate Chaos Coalition. 10,000 phone calls, letters or emails were sent by Friends of the Earth supporters to world leaders and delegates during the Copenhagen talks. 60,000 people watched Andy Atkins' video introduction to the talks on YouTube.
7

Biodiversity loss

Along with climate change, the destruction of the natural world is the greatest environmental danger we face. Deforestation, pollution, industrial agriculture and over-fishing are not only contributing to the fastest rates of extinction since the dinosaurs, but threaten the natural life-support systems on which we all depend. Friends of the Earth aims to galvanise public concern over the loss of plants, animals and their habitats in order to halt this destruction.

PROTECTING THE NATURAL WORLD

soy and the food chain The main thrust of our biodiversity work this year has been the Food Chain campaign. This exposes the hidden link between intensive livestock farming in the UK, the destruction of habitats and climate change.
Factory-farmed meat and dairy require enormous amounts of soy for animal feed. And South America's rainforests and grasslands ­ giant, natural lungs that turn carbon dioxide into oxygen ­ are being cleared to grow it. If current trends continue, cattle ranchers and soy farmers alone will destroy 40 per cent of Amazon rainforest by 2050 ­ home to nearly a third of the world's species.
We are campaigning for a shift away from factory livestock production towards more sustainable methods of farming. We have been working closely with farmers to test our solutions. And we commissioned research from the Royal Agricultural College which showed it is possible to have a thriving, sustainable meat and dairy farming sector using home-grown feeds instead of imported soy.
We have also been encouraging retailers to source soy-free meat and dairy, and work with their supply chains to develop alternative feeds.
We have worked at a local and national level to get public support for our campaign. This included backing

from some of the country's leading chefs and "Livestock", an all-star comedy night at London's Hammersmith Apollo, which drew an amazing list of talent, including Marcus Brigstocke, Stephen Merchant, Dan Antopolski, Jimmy Carr and Francesca Martinez.
An incredible range of organisations, representing millions of people, are now working with us. These include WWF, RSPB, the Soil Association, New Economics Foundation, Compassion in World Farming and the National Heart Forum. And we have had a tremendous impact in pushing food sustainability up the public and political agenda.
"I was shocked to find out just how much a Sunday roast can cost our planet under the factory farming system"
Robert Flello MP

Peter Hayes

The MOovement A major focus of our work was the Sustainable Livestock Bill ­ legislation we drafted which was adopted by Robert Flello MP and put before Parliament. The Bill included measures that would help UK farmers swap imported soy animal feed for homegrown alternatives, tackle food waste, and put more sustainable food in schools, hospitals and care homes.
The Bill's success or failure rested on a crucial Parliamentary vote in November. We launched an innovative campaign called the MOOvement to capture the public's imagination and to persuade MPs to vote for the Bill. Our moovement viral videos featuring people dressed as cows were seen by hundreds of thousands on YouTube and our publicity stunts and actions turned heads across the country.
We generated fantastic press coverage and many politicians called this the best-supported Bill campaign they've known for a long time.
But despite widespread support we fell short of the necessary backing of 100 MPs on the day of the vote ­ a Friday when many had returned to their constituencies.

8

what next? We have a strong platform to build on. It was a tremendous achievement to get an MP to adopt our Bill in the first place. The MOOvement employed some brilliant tactics to raise awareness and gain support. More than 60,000 people took action in support of the campaign and that is not the kind of number decision makers can ignore for long. And we have allies both inside and outside of Parliament.
Crucially, the Government now acknowledges that action is needed to make livestock production more sustainable. We intend to make sure this translates into a firm commitment to reduce our reliance on South American soy for animal feed. We'll do this by continuing to work with supportive MPs ­ and pushing for real action for a greener farming system and more sustainable healthy diets for all. And we'll be making sure our MOOvement supporters have every opportunity to help.

paraguay A crucial part of our Food Chain campaign is working with communities affected by soy, ensuring both political and practical approaches to a solution.
Industrial soy production is not only destroying forests and contributing to climate change ­ it's ruining lives too. Pesticide spraying of soy has increased rapidly in recent years, leading to health problems and, in some cases, deaths. This was highlighted in the film Killing Fields, which we commissioned and used to call for urgent action by governments in Europe and South America.
One of the places worst affected by industrial-scale soy is Paraguay. Some of the eastern regions of the country have as much as 30 per cent soy coverage. As soy plantations expand, small farmers are squeezed out and more forest and grasslands are turned over to agribusiness.

"People in Europe don't know what's happening here. I'd like them to come and witness the spraying"
Victoria Gonzalez, Paraguay

The Amazon is home to almost a third of the world's known species, including the critically endangered maned three-toed sloth.

Biodiversity loss

biofuels and sustainable resource use

Environmental legislation and enforcement in the country is weak, and regularly ignored by powerful landowners. But in partnership with our sister group Friends of the Earth Paraguay (Sobrevivencia), we are working with communities to halt the chainsaws and the march of soy. We have been running workshops to educate local people about their rights, how to spot common breaches of the law and how to report these to the authorities.
We have been helping communities find ways of making a living that gets the most from the environment, yet protects it, such as diversifying crops, preserving traditional seed varieties and using organic farming techniques.
We have also developed groundbreaking work training local people to use GPS to record environmental crimes. Impacts such as deforestation can then be confirmed through satellite imaging.
Another important tool is a local radio station, which has been one of the most effective ways of telling people what's really going on in the area. It's also helped to engage young people, who have been making programmes for the station.
Our work in the Luz Bella area has already resulted in the Paraguayan Environment Ministry launching eight

investigations into possible breaches of the law. These include deforestation.
In 2011 we plan to expand this work, to protect the rights and improve the livelihoods of many more indigenous communities across Paraguay.
biofuels: the problem Biofuels are another significant driver of forest destruction and biodiversity loss. Biofuels have been promoted as a green fuel because they are made from plants ­ renewable resources that absorb carbon dioxide while they grow.
However, research shows that growing crops for fuel increases demand for land which leads to more rainforests being destroyed in countries like Brazil, Malaysia and Indonesia. And a report for the European Commission found some biofuels can lead to four times more carbon dioxide polluting the atmosphere than equivalent fossil fuels.
Yet European Union and UK targets for renewable energy in transport, heat and electricity are increasing biofuel use. The UK even plans to subsidise new palm oil power stations.
Friends of the Earth is campaigning to halt damaging biofuels targets, advocating that the UK and EU should instead tackle the root causes of carbon dioxide emissions. In response to a report commissioned by Friends of the Earth in coalition with eight other organisations, the UK Government is now urging the European Commission to rethink biofuels policy.

We have also persuaded the International Finance Corporation to suspend funding for palm oil investments and caused a misleading palm oil advert to be banned in the UK.
Through grassroots and national work, we have helped stop new palm oil power stations in Avonmouth, London's Southall and Portland in Dorset.
Over the coming year we will support groups campaigning against similar plants, and work at a national and European level to promote alternative solutions to our energy and transport needs.
Waste and resources Addressing the amount that countries consume is key to restoring a healthy planet. This is especially true in the richer world where countries consume much more than their fair share of global resources.
We've been working to convince European decision makers of the importance of measuring, then reducing, our resource use. Our work has helped make resource efficiency one of the main priorities of the new EU Environment Commissioner Janez Potocnik in 2011, and we are frequently called in to contribute to expert discussions in the European Commission and Parliament.
We produced a briefing, Measuring Our Resource Use: A vital tool in creating a resource-efficient EU ­ which has been extensively distributed at EU level. The issue was discussed in depth at a successful conference of key decision makers and politicans that we organised in the European Parliament.

10

Growing demand for biofuels is destroying rainforests in Malaysia, Indonesia and Brazil.



Reuse and recycling Our campaign in 2003 led to the introduction of doorstep recycling in the UK. But more needs to be done. We need more sustainable waste treatment, including increased waste prevention, reuse and recycling instead of incineration.
We have been working to highlight what Britain currently wastes, including a study which reveals that the country needlessly throws away £650 million of recyclable materials every year.
We have had some success in Wales. The Welsh Assembly Government agreed to Friends of the Earth Cymru's demand to commit to a waste reduction target of 65 per cent by 2050.

We have also supported numerous community-led campaigns against waste incinerators which create greenhouse gases and toxic emissions. A number of incinerator proposals have been withdrawn as a result.
We move into 2011 with a golden opportunity to influence the next decade of waste policy in the UK, as the Government reviews its recycling targets. We will be pushing for a 70 per cent target by 2020, in line with best practice in Europe and well above the current aim of 50 per cent.

The ocelot, one of many vulnerable species threatened by deforestation and habitat loss.

Telford's burning issue
Telford is just one example of several successful campaigns against incinerators in 2009-2010. We liaised with councillors, held public meetings to explore the issues and helped residents submit planning objections.

Crucially, we got the support of two local MPs and worked closely with Telford PAIN (People Against Incineration Now) to propose alternative solutions. The council opted to invest in recycling and reject the incinerator.

11

Environmental justice
Friends of the Earth believes the environment is for all of us ­ and that everyone has the right to a healthy place to live and a fair share of the world's resources.

Millions of households cannot afford to keep warm in winter, often because their homes are poorly insulated. We are campaigning for minimum energy-efficiency standards in the rental sector.
(The photo is posed by a model.)

FROM PEOPLE TO PLANET

Friends of the Earth supports people in the UK and around the world, so they have a genuine say in what happens where they live. We do this through individual legal cases and campaigning for better laws affecting communities and their environment.
rights in paraguay In Paraguay, for example, you have already seen how we have been supporting people whose lives are being ruined by the march of soy plantations into farmland, grassland and forests (page 9).
greener homes Environmental justice not only brings benefits for people ­ but for the wider environment and the economy. It is also part of any credible strategy to tackle climate change.
In the UK, for example, we launched work to tackle the energy efficiency of one of the worst performing areas of housing ­ private rented homes. This sector accounts for more than 10 per cent of housing in England. Nearly one in five private tenants live in fuel poverty, meaning they spend more than a tenth of household income trying to keep warm. Fuel poverty is unacceptable in 21st century Britain, and our campaign is seeking legally-binding standards of fuel efficiency in private rented homes. This would benefit 600,000 people.

Tenants would be protected from high fuel bills. Jobs would be created insulating and improving homes. It would cut carbon equivalent to taking 500,000 cars off the road, and there would be a reduction of illnesses associated with living in cold homes ­ which our research says would save the National Health Service £600 million a year.
We have made some early progress with a Government commitment to address the private rented sector in its forthcoming Energy Bill. However, the details are yet to emerge and in 2011, we will be focusing our efforts on ensuring it will deliver both for people and the planet.
Rights & Justice Centre At the heart of our environmental justice work is our unique Rights & Justice Centre. We are the only national environmental organisation providing free legal advice and representation for those who need to use the law to protect their communities and the environment.
"I found myself out of my depth at the wrong end of an injunction from a major multinational. At my moment of greatest need, Friends of the Earth's lawyers were there to make sure that my rights were not abused and justice was done"
Shlomo Dowen

We support those worst affected by environmental problems, who often struggle to get their opinions heard. Acting on behalf of community group Fight the Flights, for example, we challenged Newham Borough Council's decision to allow the London City airport to almost double the number of take offs and landings. The case went to Court in November 2010 and we are awaiting the judgment.
We also work on cases that will bring about a change in law to benefit many communities and the environment. For example, Friends of the Earth won a landmark Freedom of Information judgment on behalf of Nottinghamshire resident Shlomo Dowen.
Shlomo was trying to get information on the contract between his council and the huge waste company Veolia. Veolia tried to prevent this with an injunction. We acted for Shlomo in the High Court ­ which ruled in our favour, throwing out Veolia's case. The judgment sets an important precedent for people who want information about how councils are spending their money.
Power up 2010 Empowerment is an important part of our environmental justice work with communities and individuals. Our annual Power Up residential weekend, where we train people on community rights and campaigning tools, is the flagship

12

of this work. This year we brought together a diverse group of 50 people to learn more about community rights and environmental justice.
The weekend blended some familiar ingredients ­ workshops on how to use the planning system and important legal tools such as Freedom of Information ­ with some new additions, such as community film-making.
Planning As well as working with communities, we are making progress at a national level. The Government has recently introduced a new planning system for large projects such as power stations, airports and large incinerators. This new system makes it much harder for people to influence what is built in their area. Not only does the developer run the public consultation, the final decision is not taken by the local council or Government Minister but by an unaccountable, unelected body called the Infrastructure Planning Commission (IPC). We advocated that decisions on

such large controversial developments must be made by a democratically accountable body or individual. The Coalition Government now has plans to scrap the IPC and ensure that the relevant Government Minister takes the final decision on big developments. Some projects, however, are already in the planning system, such as an incinerator in Merthyr Tydfil, south Wales. This would be one of the biggest in the UK, taking waste from all over Wales.
Like many areas chosen for potentially controversial projects, Merthyr Tydfil is an area of high unemployment that's already suffered environmental degradation. It has the UK's largest open-cast coal mine on its doorstep, and the incinerator would

exacerbate existing economic, social and environmental problems. Friends of the Earth is working with local people to raise awareness of the issue and to help them challenge the application.
In 2011 we will continue to support communities affected by bad environmental decisions, and work with them to get their opinions heard. This includes working on individual cases, and pressing national Government for a fairer planning system.

Making a difference on the ground
As well as addressing policy, we have also been tackling planning issues on the ground. For example, in Banbridge, Northern Ireland, we worked with the local Chamber of Commerce to oppose a gigantic, out-of-town Tesco store, successfully arguing that it would have a detrimental impact on a thriving town centre. And in Westbury, Wiltshire, we helped

persuade the Government to reject plans for a bypass through the Wellhead Valley, just below the famous White Horse. Years of campaigning and new planning applications from the local council had forced the scheme to a public inquiry, where the planning inspector agreed that the landscape impact was too high.

13

Jon Challicom

 Warren Allott

Economy
Friends of the Earth aims to change the way the UK economy works so that it respects the planet's natural limits and meets the challenge of tackling climate change.
A green route to recovery

Hundreds of thousands of jobs could be created building a low-carbon economy. Councils alone could create 70,000 jobs in England and Wales by insulating homes and businesses and fitting green energy systems to buildings.

We are pushing for investment in green technologies and a reduction in energy demand to make our economy more sustainable, create new business opportunities and generate thousands of jobs.
Though the year was dominated by recession and talk of spending cuts, we maintained that this was a major opportunity to promote low-carbon measures and build a greener economy.
For example, we commissioned research showing that councils alone could create at least 70,000 jobs across England and Wales by insulating homes and businesses and fitting green energy technology to buildings. As well as the obvious social benefits, this would save energy and radically reduce emissions.

Boosting renewable energy Friends of the Earth believes the UK can meet future energy needs with demand efficiencies and a mix of renewables. This is supported by the Government's own research. In Wales, we helped persuade the Welsh Assembly Government to support a major expansion in renewable energy generation. And the UK as a whole made an important step forward with the introduction of feed-in tariffs (FITs) where homes, businesses and communities get paid for generating green electricity.
This was a fantastic achievement for Friends of the Earth and its supporters, who led the campaign for FITs.
There's a lot more to do, however. The current scheme demands only 2 per cent of UK electricity should be produced from small-scale renewables by 2020. Along with others, we're pushing to see this amount tripled.

We also need to encourage other forms of green energy generation ­ not just electricity. We have therefore been campaigning for the Government to introduce payments for people who produce their own renewable heat, from such things as solar panels for hot water, ground source heat pumps and animal waste on farms. And in 2011 a Renewable Heat Incentive to do just that will be launched.
MPs supporting our renewable heat campaign. From left: Caroline Lucas, Zac Goldsmith and Alan Whitehead.

Green job creation

Friends of the Earth research shows a green economy can create thousands of jobs ­ and this is being borne out on the ground. In Teesside, when the Government announced a massive roll-out of offshore wind in the North Sea, we identified an opportunity to deliver a crucial economic and environmental boost to a region reeling from the closure of the local Corus iron and steel plant. We submitted a detailed briefing to the

region's MPs, calling for investment in local industry instead of sourcing components from overseas (as had happened with the London Array wind farm). The MPs' subsequent report made substantial reference to these opportunities and Corus has since announced over 200 jobs will be created in building the structures that secure turbines to the sea bed.

Other important wins include:
Carbon pricing Research by our economics team and academics led the Government to make changes to the way it prices carbon. The cost of carbon is one of the factors that Governments take into account when considering new developments, such as power stations, where the economic cost of pollution has to be factored in. The changes are great news for the climate because the new price for carbon is higher and rises steeply over time. This makes it harder for Ministers to give the green light to polluting projects such as new runways.

A Green Investment Bank In the March 2010 Budget the Government announced it would set up a Green Investment Bank to bring billions of pounds of private investment into low-carbon technology. Friends of the Earth had worked tirelessly with businesses, investors and other groups to push for such a commitment. The Bank will be a core element of a green economy.

14

15

Community
The work of our local volunteer groups
Friends of the Earth works at a community level across England, Wales and Northern Ireland. Often this is through more than 220 local volunteer groups. This is one of our strengths as a campaigning organisation. It means we can bring about change at a grassroots level as well as build support for our campaigns on a national and international stage. 16

Friends of the Earth Friends of the Earth

Portsmouth schoolboys Jackson Clark, Jake Chandry and Matthew West, part of the Grow to Eat Well project.

There have been many creative campaigns from our local groups. Here's just a taste of the wonderful things they've been doing:
grow to eat well Grow to Eat Well is a scheme running in Portsmouth schools, teaching students and families about the benefits of growing their own food. Working with a number of other organisations, Portsmouth Friends of the Earth successfully applied to the Big Lottery Local Food Fund for a grant of £250,000 to get going. The aim is to roll out the scheme to 35 schools in the next three years.
no to plastic bags Walsall Friends of the Earth formed bag-making group Walsall Saddlebags to raise awareness of the impact of plastic bags. They engaged a diverse range of communities. This included

working with the Aaina Asian women's centre and the local primary school to demonstrate the need to reduce the use of plastic bags.
derby day Derby Friends of the Earth, with local residents, has successfully opposed not one but two proposed incinerators in the city. Their extensive campaigning included proposals for alternative solutions to incineration, and is a great example of how Friends of the Earth groups can work with affected communities to oppose environmentally damaging proposals.
northern lights Thanks to your support, Friends of the Earth's groups in the North East have continued to deliver a range of environmental benefits. In Alnwick the local group organised a season of green films at a local cinema, and public events included an Environmental Question Time.

In North Tyneside, the local group joined forces with the council to stage the second annual Big Green Seaside Station Day, promoting sustainable living and transport to over 2,000 people. Darlington Friends of the Earth launched Gro Zone, working with community groups, the council and Groundwork to turn wasteland into temporary growing spaces for local people.
young people Local groups also have a Youth and Education Network that works with young people. Run entirely by volunteers, this enables local people to deliver educational events and activities, and visit schools to foster the next generation of environmentalists.
"I have started walking to school more often and I've been using less water in the kettle. I hope I'm a bit greener and it will change me a lot more."
Kelsee, 4th Derby Guides, after taking part in the Be A Climate Champion project with Friends of the Earth.

Girlguiding UK
Last year saw the conclusion of the Be a Climate Champion project between Friends of the Earth and Girlguiding UK. We asked more than 1,400 Brownies and Guides to test a selection of green solutions. The idea was to unearth the barriers preventing people living climate-friendly lifestyles, and the findings formed the basis of a report that helped inform our Get Serious About CO2 campaign. We also ran a competition, asking the girls what they would say to world leaders about the climate. Three winners were selected for a weekend in London, where they joined a huge march in the run-up to the Copenhagen climate summit and were interviewed on stage as part of the main rally.

Charis Gates and Friends of the Earth Executive Director Andy Atkins. Charis was one of the winners of our climate competition with Girlguiding UK.

17

WHERE YOUR MONEY GOES

Friends of the Earth Trust

Statement of financial activities for the year ended 31 May 2010

Friends of the Earth Trust is committed to the conservation, protection and improvement of the environment and promotes sustainable development for public benefit. It furthers these objectives by campaigning, undertaking research, education and publishing, and providing an information service on solutions to environmental problems.

Income Expenditure Surplus for the year

£ 8,121,597 8,080,547
41,050

Breakdown of expenditure:
Safe climate 50% Healthy planet 17%

Board members
Mike Smyth (Chair) Jeremy Birch Pat Chapman-Pincher Dave Coleman Stewart Crocker Jess Gold Hilary Griffiths John Halladay Mark Hammond Bonnie Horsman Michael Hughes Anthony Rae John Tiller Paula Whitney
Trustees who stepped down during 2009-2010: Roger Byrom, Suzy Edwards, Ursel Luhde, Andrew McMurray, Frank Pennycook.

Fair world 13%
Supporter recruitment 3% Restructuring costs 5%
Costs of generating funds 11%
Governance 1%
"We chose to support Friends of the Earth financially because it works effectively with the large official bodies, like national governments, who can really make a difference. Friends of the Earth identifies the causes of our biggest environmental challenges, finds genuine solutions then works with these big agencies to make it happen. All this takes focused work, dedication and patience, and Friends of the Earth have proved that they have these qualities, along with the expertise required for such long and complicated tasks."
Evelyn and Paul Strasburger

The accounts for Friends of the Earth Trust and Friends of the Earth Limited were audited by haysmacintyre. They were approved on 23 October 2010 and have been submitted to the Charity Commission and Companies House. These summary financial statements do not contain sufficient information to allow a full understanding of the financial affairs of the charity or company. The full set of unqualified audited accounts and reports is available at www.foe.co.uk.
