 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR, Wednesday, April 16, 2008 246 mots, p. 12

Stern review critic still sees climate change risks

From Prof Robert Picciotto.

Sir, In a favourable review of Lord Lawson's concise and controversial book An Appeal to Reason ("The climate heretic's handbook", April 14), Clive Crook brings to bear Professor Sir Partha Dasgupta's elegant critique of the Stern report. But Prof Dasgupta's rigorous methodological argument hardly confirms Mr Crook's characterisation of the Stern review as a "sacred text of climate alarmism".

To be sure, Prof Dasgupta deplores the lack of sensitivity analyses of the Stern review and he disputes its elasticity estimates of social weights for consumption. But he is equally critical of the macroeconomic models used by climate change sceptics and he endorses Stern's fundamental premise that we should not discount the well-being of future generations simply because they will only appear in the future. Indeed, Prof Dasgupta views climate change as one of the most significant environmental issues facing humanity.

Furthermore, he argues that the poor world will bear much of the burden of a damaged earth and he stresses that the rich world has a particular responsibility to provide funding for mitigation and adaptation since it is the now developed world that has generated a disproportionate share of greenhouse gas emissions. Prof Dasgupta also notes that the rich in the industrial democracies have been paying more than the 2 per cent of the gross domestic product proposed by Stern to combat climate change.

Since technological solutions (carbon sequestration, alternative energy, etc) may be harder to realise than currently hoped, Prof Dasgupta concludes that it would not be unreasonable for rich countries to invest more to mitigate the effects of climate change than recommended by Stern.

This is hardly supportive of the former chancellor's spirited but misguided attack on climate change activists.

Robert Picciotto,

King's College London,

London WC2R 2LS
