 WORLD NEWS, Wednesday, December 23, 2009 372 mots, p. 4

EU reflects on hard truth after climate 'disaster'
By Joshua Chaffin in Brussels

Europe's environment ministers added to the chorus of gloom over the outcome of the Copenhagen climate summit yesterday as they confronted the broader question of how the bloc could gain influence over a negotiation dominated by China and the US.

Andreas Carlgren, environment minister of Sweden, which holds the rotating European Union presidency, called the Copenhagen accord "a disaster" and "a great failure" as yesterday's EU meeting began.

"It was obvious that ministers broadly expressed their disappointment with the results of Copenhagen, which didn't at all meet the expectations or ambitions of the European Union," Mr Carlgren added after lunch with counterparts from the EU's 27 member states.

One immediate target of criticism was the unwieldy United Nations negotiating process, which several nations blamed for Copenhagen's failure. EU states have asked the European Commission to draw up recommendations to streamline the process, and to limit obstructionist tactics. They are expected to discuss them at a meeting in Seville on January 15-17.

Mr Carlgren reiterated the EU's commitment to reaching an ambitious, legally binding agreement. The pressure, he said, was now on the US after the public pleas made in Copenhagen by Barack Obama, the US president.

But members were grasping for answers on how to proceed after Copenhagen revealed a gap between the EU's ambitions to lead the fight against global warming and its limited clout on the world stage. The EU had believed its stature as the first bloc to pass binding emissions reductions targets and its leadership on climate finance for developing countries would give it a prime seat at the table. Yet it was not even invited to a final meeting at which leading developed countries struck the decisive deal with the US.

"We've been taught some lessons about the realities of the so-called multi-polar world," Carl Bildt, Sweden's foreign minister, told the Financial Times. "These lessons will have to be taken into account when we go for a more comprehensive global agreement."

Diplomats acknowledged that the EU's strategy of offering to deepen its emissions cuts - from 20 per cent below 1990 levels to 30 per cent - if other nations showed comparable effort had failed to provide leverage over the US or China.

In the wake of Copenhagen, the 30 per cent pledge has faced renewed attacks from European business, which fears being left at a competitive disadvantage.

Mr Carlgren said he expected rising calls for the EU to adopt a tougher line by threatening to impose carbon border taxes against countries unwilling to sign up to an ambitious agreement. But he warned that such a move risked greater "fragmentation" of the global community, while Germany and others opposed it as it would hurt exporters.

"This is a time for reflection," Mr Carlgren said.

