Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, October 13, 2010BBC TOLD TO ENSURE BALANCE ON CLIMATE CHANGENeil MidgleyTHE BBC faces having to give greater prominence to climate change sceptics in its coverage after new editorial guidelines that call for impartiality in its science coverage.The BBC has been accused of bias repeatedly in its reporting of climate change issues. Last year, one of its journalists, Paul Hudson, was criticised for not reporting on some of the controversial "Climategate" leaked emails from the University of East Anglia, even though he had been in possession of them for some time.Climate change sceptics have also accused the BBC of not adequately reporting the discrediting of a study from the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change which said that glaciers would melt by 2035.The BBC's editorial guidelines, published yesterday after a consultation that considered more than 1,600 submissions from the public, expressly say for the first time that scientific issues fall within the corporation's obligation to be impartial."The BBC must be inclusive, consider the broad perspective, and ensure that the existence of a range of views is appropriately reflected," said Alison Hastings, a BBC trustee. "The new guideline extends the definition of 'controversial' subjects beyond those of public policy and political or industrial controversy to include controversy within religion, science, finance, culture, ethics and other matters."James Delingpole, a prominent climate change sceptic and Telegraph columnist, said yesterday: "It's highly unlikely that they'll be more balanced in their coverage."It's a whole cultural thing at the BBC -- that people who don't believe are just 'flat earthers'," he claimed. "Whenever they invite dissenters like me on to debates, they surround us with 'warmists'. On Any Questions, for example, Jonathan Dimbleby does his best to be impartial, but this is a man with a wind turbine in his garden."In 2007, a BBC Trust report called Safeguarding Impartiality in the 21st Century said: "Climate change is another subject where dissenters can be unpopular ... the BBC has held a high-level seminar with some of the best scientific experts, and has come to the view that the weight of evidence no longer justifies equal space being given to the opponents of the consensus. "But these dissenters (or even sceptics) will still be heard, as they should, because it is not the BBC's role to close down this debate."The BBC Trust is currently conducting a separate review, led by Prof Steve Jones from University College London, into impartiality in the corporation's science coverage. He will report next spring.Another new guideline, on religious coverage, stipulates that "content dealing with matters of religion and likely to cause offence to those with religious views and beliefs must be editorially justified".Terry Sanderson, the president of the National Secular Society, said this would put "severe restrictions on comedians, documentary makers, satirists and commentators who want to be critical of religion.Almost anything that isn't wholly reverential towards religious beliefs can be perceived as offensive by some believers."A spokesman for the BBC Trust said: "Editorial decisions about who to feature on BBC output are a matter for the BBC Executive. However, the new editorial guidelines make clear that the requirements for due impartiality do not necessarily require equal time to be given to the range of opinions on a given subject."