Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, April 24, 2010BRITAIN'S SILENT REVOLUTIONGeoffrey Lean'Brighton," was Lord Olivier's response, when asked what success smelled like. On May 7 the Greens may agree: their leader, Caroline Lucas, is oddson favourite to win there to become the party's first Green MP. But environmentalists have already scored a far greater victory in this election - only no one is talking about it.No matter how the votes tally up in Brighton Pavilion, the contest has greened British politics - to a degree that would have been unimaginable last time the country trudged off to the polls. All the major parties are signed up to transforming Britain into a green, lowcarbon economy to boost growth, as well as to combat climate change.If they meet their promises - global warming and rising fossil fuel prices will make it hard for them to avoid it for long - they will effect the biggest change in Britain since the Industrial Revolution steamed into life in a blaze of coal.It's all there in the manifestos. The Conservatives aim to make Britain the "world's first low-carbon economy"; the Lib Dems want Britain to "lead the new green economy that the world needs"; and Labour maintains that ours is already "a transition economy from high carbon to low carbon". And all have set out more or less far-reaching policies to put the promises into practice.This will have a more profound and lasting effect on our lives than anything else in their manifestos. But you'd never guess it from the hustings. Green issues have hardly featured - apart from some lacklustre exchanges on climate change during Thursday's leaders' debate.Little attention has been paid to the low-carbon economy, and on how it might be created, despite a little-noticed attempt by Nick Clegg to introduce the subject on Monday. No doubt it will get a mention or two in next week's debate on the economy, but I would not bet on it playing a central part.And that, to my mind, is profoundly undemocratic. If our political parties are bent on taking the economy in a new direction, surely they have a duty to lay out their plans in detail before the electorate and to explain their importance? It's not as if they haven't done the work. The Tories last year produced a groundbreaking policy document. The Lib Dems have 77 policies, marked out in green, scattered throughout their manifesto (though there is a bit of doublecounting).And Labour can point to recent achievement - under the aegis of that unlikely eco-warrior Lord Mandelson - in attracting green industry and jobs.Part of the problem is that there is not that much difference between the parties on the issues: the main note of dissent in the debate was a superficial slanging match over nuclear power. But there is an important philosophical difference between the Tories, who want to encourage people through incentives, and Labour, which relies more on regulation.A more substantial drawback is that the environment is not thought to be a votewinner in general elections. But is that true this time? The admittedly unfocused national mood is for change, and this is the greatest departure that the parties have to offer.And if David Cameron has lost some of his freshness to Nick Clegg and finds that the electorate has trouble in working out where he stands, maybe that has something to do with his more recent failure to stress the green issues with which he freshened up his party and which originally defined him in the public mind.Maybe it's time for a trip to Brighton.