Telegraph (London, UK) Monday, July 26, 2010COUNTRYSIDE NEGLECTED IN CLIMATE BATTLEDaily Telegraph ReporterIMPORTANT issues affecting the countryside have been overlooked because of the focus on climate change, campaigners have said.The battle against global warming which dominated government environment policy had taken place amid a "piecemeal degradation" of rural Britain.Under the last government, major legislation was introduced to cut carbon emissions in an effort to tackle global warming.But the countryside continued to lose important wildlife such as farmland birds, meadows and bees.Ben Stafford, from the Campaign to Protect Rural England, said the countryside had been "neglected"."For the last few years, climate change has been the sexy issue whereas protecting biodiversity was not politically exciting," he said.The Coalition has promised to bring the focus back on to issues such as endangered animals and cleaner water.The first environmental paper to be introduced by the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs in 20 years will focus on protecting the countryside. Helen Meech, from the National Trust, said some "great legislation" was brought in by the last government to cut greenhouse gases by 80 per cent on 1990 levels by 2050.But there was a need for new laws to protect the environment that was suffering now, she said.Honey bees are in crisis, 97 per cent of flower-rich meadows have been lost since 1930, and house sparrow numbers fell by 10 million in the past 25 years."We've lost sight of the benefits the natural world provides because they are not accountable within markets and everyone takes them for granted," she said.Miss Meech welcomed the move by the Coalition as an opportunity to bring the natural environment back up the agenda.Caroline Spelman, the Environment Secretary, is due to unveil a discussion paper at the Royal Botanic Gardens at Kew. A White Paper will be published next spring.She said: "We have the opportunity to be the generation that puts a stop to the piecemeal degradation of our natural environment."