Telegraph (London, UK) Monday, December 6, 2010RISING SEA -LEVEL THREAT DOWNGRADEDLouise Gray Environment Correspondent in CancunTHE Met Office has halved its "worst case" prediction for rising sea levels, in the latest instance of scientists apparently overstating the possible consequences of global warming.Previously scientists had said oceans could rise by up to 13ft (4m), threatening cities such as Shanghai, London and New York by 2100.But it has been revised so that now the worse case scenario is just over 6ft 6in (2m). This is still unlikely, but would mean the Maldives in the Indian Ocean and Tuvalu in the Pacific could be lost forever. The most plausible sea level rise this century remains between 8in and 23in (20-60cm), causing devastation in small island states and low-lying countries such as Bangladesh.The new report also found that the Atlantic "conveyer belt" is not slowing down as much as previously thought. The circulation of currents, also known as the Gulf Stream, keeps Britain warm and it is feared that if it slows down suddenly it could cause a "second ice age".The scenario was presented in the film The Day After Tomorrow and has even been blamed for the recent cold snaps, but it appears it is unlikely to affect Britain this century. The revisions will be pounced upon by sceptics as evidence that the Met Office has exaggerated climate change.However Vicky Pope, head of climate change advice, said that, overall, the new report concluded that most global warming predictions were the same or worse than previously thought. "The evidence of the dangerous impacts of climate change is now clearer than ever," she said.The report analysed all the recent peer-reviewed papers on climate change, on behalf of the British Government, to reassess the threats since the last major study on global warming was carried out by the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), in 2007. It found that the melting of the Arctic was occurring faster than predicted, with icefree summers expected by the middle of this century. Deforestation could also speed up as droughts in the Amazon cause forest fires.The report was launched at the UN Cancun Climate Change summit, which remains deadlocked over whether to introduce a legally binding carbon emissions treaty.Chris Huhne, the Energy and Climate Change Secretary, is flying to Cancun to try to resolve the impasse. He insisted the talks were on track to achieve the goal of a new treaty.