Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, August 31, 2010UN'S CLIMATE BODY TOLD TO STOP LOBBYINGStephen Adams and Robert WinnettTHE UN's climate-change body should stop lobbying and restrict itself to explaining the science behind any changes in global temperature, an independent inquiry into its conduct has warned.Senior officials at the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) should disclose outside financial interests and controls should be introduced to ensure that scientific claims in influential international reports are robust, it found.The inquiry was ordered after the IPCC admitted exaggerating the pace at which Himalayan glaciers were melting in a landmark report in 2007. Several other errors were also uncovered.The admission threatened to undermine the basis on which governments justified spending billions of pounds tackling  .Yesterday's inquiry report said that the 2007 findings on the rate of climate change and its risks were generally sound, and had "been a success and served society well".But the IPCC's conduct had on occasions "dented the credibility of the process". It warned that "straying into advocacy can only hurt IPCC's credibility".The review, by a group of international scientific academies, will put pressure on Rajenda Pachauri, the Indian head of the IPCC . He said last night that he would step down if signatory governments backed calls for him to go.Harold Shapiro, a Princeton professor who chaired the review, said that part of the 2007 report contained "many statements that were assigned high confidence but for which there is little evidence".The IPCC's response when the errors were uncovered was "slow and inadequate". The review called for the development of a "rigorous conflict of interest policy", as is standard in most government departments and international bodies."It's hard to see how the United Nations can both follow the advice of this committee and keep Rajendra Pachauri on board as head," said Roger Pielke Jr, a professor at the University of Colorado.Achim Steiner, the head of the UN Environmental Program, said the review "reaffirms the integrity, the importance and validity of the IPCC's work while recognising areas for improvement in a rapidly evolving field."