Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, December 8, 2010BROWN DOOMED CLIMATE TALKS BY TRYING TO FORCE DEAL, SAYS PRESCOTTLouise Gray Environment Correspondent in CancunTHE Copenhagen climate change talks descended into chaos because Gordon Brown tried to force a deal too early, according to Lord Prescott.The former deputy prime minister said the world needed more time to agree on a global deal to cut emissions and Mr Brown made a "wrong judgment" trying to push for a legally binding deal last year."His attempt to get Europe to go from 20 to 30 per cent [in emissions cuts by 2020], to get $100 billion from the Americans [for climate aid] on the basis he could force the Chinese into a legal agreement -- there was no chance of doing that, especially in four days. That was why everybody was shouting at each other," Lord Prescott said. "I said to Gordon Brown, 'you cannot bloody get it. You are putting yourself on the line'."A single legally binding deal failed to materialise in Copenhagen, and only a weak voluntary accord in which countries offered to curb emissions was achieved.Speaking in his role as special envoy on climate change for the European Council, Lord Prescott said the latest round of talks in Cancun, Mexico, were also likely to be unsuccessful.He said the world should be working towards a voluntary agreement, including money to help poor countries adapt and carbon targets, until all nations were ready to sign up to a treaty.More than 190 countries are gathered in Cancun to discuss issues on the best way to stop global warming.Chris Huhne, the Climate Change Secretary, said that a successful outcome was going to depend on countries compromising.Conference's carbon footprint equal to 4,500 homes for a yearThe Cancun Climate Conference is using as much energy as a village in England for a whole year.More than 190 countries are meeting in the resort for two weeks to discuss the best way to bring down global carbon emissions.The total carbon footprint of the conference, according to the Mexican government, is 25,000 tons -- equivalent to 4,500 British households for a year. The carbon footprint of the conference is five times as much as the last meeting in Copenhagen, even though fewer people are attending the conference.There are about 15,000 delegates this year compared with about 45,000 people from governments, media and nongovernmental organisations who attended the Copenhagen conference.