The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, July 17, 2010VAST POTENTIA REWARDS FOR A GREENER UKGeoffrey LeanNot since a new age flared into life in the furnaces of the Industrial Revolution have we faced such a transition in our use of energy. For more than 200 years the burning of fossil fuels - oil, gas and coal - has brought previously unimagined wealth to much of the world. But concerns over climate change, energy security and restrictions on supplies are now turning us towards new technologies to provide low-carbon prosperity for rich and poor countries alike. Today the Daily Telegraph and Shell launch a new partnership aimed at setting the agenda for tackling this energy challenge. A series of monthly pages will explore the most crucial issues - selected Chris Huhne puts the case on behalf of the Government a panel of seven of Britain's leading experts, featured below. Live events and online discussion will engage Daily Telegraph readers in a conversation on the problems and potential solutions. And the process will feed directly into government thinking: Chris Huhne, the Energy and Climate Change Secretary, who writes a keynote article below, will be following it closely. All of us who are involved in this exciting - and, we believe, unprecedented - project hope that you will join us in attempting to chart the way forward into a challenging, but immensely promising new age of energy. 91 Geoffrey Lean, The Daily TelegraphTwo months ago the Coalition Government published its programme for government, in which we pledged a package of measures to fulfil our joint ambitions for a low-carbon and eco-friendly economy. Speaking at my department during his first few days in office, the Prime Minister announced that this will be the greenest government ever. The challenge is huge: to reduce the potential impacts of climate change and ensure our future energy security by weaning ourselves off our addiction to fossil fuels. And we face it as we come out of recession, wrestling with our biggest ever peacetime deficit. Economic recovery, energy security and climatestabilisation all require a commitment to a consistent, long-term policy and this month I will present to Parliament the first of our promised annual statements on energy policy.Alongside this we will publish the detailed analysis and underpinning data of the 2050 Pathways project, which will help us understand the scale of the challenge and the choices and trade-offs we will have to make over the next 40 years. The long-term task is nothing less than the transformation of our economy, to put in place the right incentives for low-carbon growth to create the investment, exports and jobs we need to bring back economic prosperity. In short, we must seize our share of the green technology revolution and make the UK the best place in the world to do energy business.During that transition we must secure diversity of energy supplies from abroad while making the most of our home-grown energy, including North Sea oil and gas, and developing renewables technologies such as wind and marine. There can be a role for nuclear so long as there is no public subsidy, a pledge set out in the coalition agreement and guaranteed by the state of the public finances. Carbon capture and storage can also provide us with a low-carbon energy source to meet peaks in energy demand. It will be government's role to provide the long-term certainty in which to develop this new energy infrastructure.GBP200 billion of investment is needed over the coming decade and we intend to leverage private sector investment through a Green Investment Bank. We are working on a wide range of options for the scope and structure of the Bank and will bring forward detailed proposals in the autumn. In the recent Emergency Budget the Chancellor also announced that we will reshape the   Levy as the way of delivering our coalition commitment to a carbon price floor, in order to boost investment across the range of low-carbon energy technologies. The cheapest way of closing the gap between energy demand and supply is through energy-saving measures. The Green Deal for households will be established through legislation in the forthcoming Energy Security and Green Economy Bill and will encourage home energy efficiency improvements such as insulation and lagging, paid for by savings from energy bills.Energy saving will also mean smart meters and smart grids that can give consumers control over their appliances, curb energy waste and save money. We will take measures to improve energy efficiency in businesses and public sector buildings - we are leading by example with a target to reduce central government carbon emissions by 10 per cent within 12 months. The transition to a low-carbon UK will be a mammoth task and will in time directly affect us all. Inaction, however, is not an option and the potential rewards for our country are vast That is why I will be looking keenly at the progress of the Telegraph/Shell Age of Energy partnership and hope participants and readers alike find it an informative initiative. Chris Huhne is Energy and Climate Change SecretaryOPENING THE DEBATE WHAT OUR PANEL OF LEADING EXPERTS THINK Jeremy Nicholson DIRECTOR, ENERGY INTENSIVE USERS GROUP The priority for consumers is ensuring that energy supplies remain secure at an affordable price. This is best achieved by allowing freedom to invest in a diverse mix of fuels. All energy sources - coal, gas, oil, nuclear and renewable - have a role for the foreseeable future. But since we need to address climate concerns, government should ensure future investment is directed towards lowcarbon energy sources by putting a price on carbon emissions. Instead, it has mandated a massive increase in expensive renewables, mostly unreliable wind power which regularly depends on fossil fuelled backup. The cost of hidden renewable subsidies buried in consumers' bills is GBP1.4bn per year and growing, increasing fuel poverty and damaging the competitiveness of British manufacturing. We need an honest debate about this: if it's easier to keep the lights on and reduce emissions affordably with more nuclear and less wind, what's wrong with that? Gordon MacKerron Bernice Lee DIRECTOR, SUSSEX ENERGY GROUR SUSSEX UNIVERSITYClimate change is the most challenging long-term global Issue and it is vital that the world takes mitigating it seriously. Practically, this involves radical cuts in carbon dioxide emissions which can only be delivered by the energy system - through low-carbon electricity, heat and transport. Energy security is also vital: without enough of it, governments are unlikely to take mitigation seriously. So the critical energy policy issue is reconciling radical emission cuts with maintaining energy security. There is a central role for a very low-carbon use of coal, though we dont yet know how successful this will be. Meanwhile promoting better energy efficiency and greatly expanding renewable energy should become cornerstones of policy. Finally, all this needs to be achieved while restricting energy price rises - otherwise access to enough modem energy will be denied to poor people everywhere.RESEARCH DIRECTOR, ENERGY, ENVIRONMENT AND RESOURCE GOVERNANCE, CHATHAM HOUSE The UK commitment to moving to a low-carbon economy by 2050 poses daunting challenges - not least because of the imminent need to replace ageing or obsolete plants, equipment, grids and buildings. Policymakers and strategic investors must be aware of the benefits of investing now to ensure multiple sources of clean, sustainable energy for the future. The government must support systematic investment in infrastructure to enable the country to roll out the planned levels of renewables. Many of the needed technologies are already commercially available or near to market. We will miss the next great wave of energy investment if these are not deployed globally in the next 20-30 years. Getting it right will enable the UK and EU to capture a large share of clean energy markets - one of the fastest growing areas of the global economy. James SmithCHAIRMAN, SHELL UK Energy improves lives and lifts people out of poverty, but needs to be produced more cleanly. The challenge we face is to produce a lot more energy and a lot less carbon dioxide. There are just two big levers to pull: vastly improving energy efficiency and significantly decarbonising energy production. The pace of change will clearly need to accelerate. But tantalisingly, the technologies to get the job done already exist. They are by no means perfect at present but they can be improved. There will have to be huge growth in alternative energies such as wind, solar and advanced biofuels. Nuclear has a role to play. And fossil fuels, together with carbon capture and storage, will long be essential: gas, the lowest carbon one, will be especially important This is about mustering our common will. We should be daunted by the scale of the challenge but invigorated by the opportunity such change will bring. Matthew Spencer DIRECTOR, GREEN ALLIANCE Carbon, the basis of life on Earth, has become the principal threat to it. We've distorted the world's carbon cycle by using fossil fuels a million times faster than they were created. We now have to get the cycle back in balance by creating a zero-carbon energy system.There are two solutions; use less energy and generate large quantities of clean electricity. Self-interest should drive energy efficient behaviour but often doesn't because of the hassle involved in doing the right thing. One solution is to make good energy consumption a requirement So, just as you can't enter a building site without a hard hat, you now can't sell a house without telling the buyer how energy efficient it is. Rapidly generating large quantities of zero-carbon electricity is the sort of challenge that engineers like, but financiers don't The planned Green Investment Bank would attract individual and institutional investors and allow for a uniquely British approach to the energy challenge. Tim Yeo CHAIR OF THE ENERGY AND CLIMATE CHANGE PARLIAMENTARY SELECT COMMITTEE We must make our homes and businesses more energy efficient Increasingly electricity must come from low-carbon sources, including nuclear, waste and renewables. No new coal-fired power stations should be approved without carbon capture and storage, the single technological breakthrough most urgently needed. Once electricity generation is decarbonised, emissions from transport and buildings can be cut The tax system can encourage the use of low-emission vehicles and the greening of the built environment, while investment in high-speed rail can reverse the growth of short-haul flights. The world is on the brink of a lowcarbon revolution: decisions made in the next five years will determine whether Britain leads it Countries and companies which recognise the opportunity will enjoy a first-mover advantage.If we dont raise our game soon China will overtake us. Gaynor Hartnell CEO, RENEWABLE ENERGY ASSOCIATION Only two per cent of our energy comes from renewables, while Sweden manages 49 per cent. Even Germany - a similar size to us in resources and population density - manages five times as much proportionally as us. The most important task for Britain is to switch to them rapidly, while simultaneously reducing energy demand through increasing efficiency. Renewables are not properly understood in Britain. People just think of wind turbines not realising that renewables can also heat our homes, fuel our transportation and decarbonise our gas network. Rapid transformation is possible, if there's the political will. The new Government must focus on getting the incentives right and letting renewables evolve, innovate and flourish. The UK has always excelled in innovation, but fails to capitalise on it The economic and employment opportunities of renewables are so exceptional that politicians should seize them with both hands."The transition to a low carbon UKwillbea mammoth task and will in time directly affect us all