

Wednesday, February 26, 2014

Financial Times (FT.com) • 259 words

Businesses seek urgent action on
climate change after floods

By Jim Pickard, Chief Political Correspondent

Nom de la source
Financial Times (FT.com)
Type de source
Presse • Presse Web
Périodicité
En continu
Couverture géographique
Internationale
Provenance
Londres, Grand Londres, Royaume-Uni



Executives from some of Britain's biggest companies have written to the Financial Times calling on Westminster to tackle the "growing risk of widespread flooding" which they link to climate change.

Senior figures from companies including Lloyds Banking Group, Kingfisher and Aviva, have urged the main political parties to act to address the causes of climate change and "look beyond the short term".

In recent years, environmental concerns have been eclipsed in British political debate by issues such as the credit crunch and subsequent recession.

But the savage winter storms and record rainfall have prompted fresh calls for an urgent reassessment of climate change.

The issue dominated prime minister's questions on Wednesday, as David Cameron was challenged by Ed Miliband over whether he had "climate change deniers" in his cabinet.

Mr Cameron rejected this, saying: "Man-made climate change is one of the most serious threats this country and this world faces."

The letter to the FT, organised by the Aldersgate Group - an umbrella group for green-minded businesses - draws a direct link between the widespread flooding in Somerset and the Thames Valley and climate change.

"The type of extreme weather that we are currently experiencing is in line with climate-change predictions, which also warn that such events will become more frequent," says the letter. "We believe that a far-sighted cross-party response is urgently needed."

The signatories include Neil Carson, chief executive of Johnson Matthey, Russell Higginbotham, UK chief executive of Swiss Re, Neil Thomas, a managing director at Atkins, and Lynda Simmons, a director of Mitie.

They want the government to look not only at how to tackle flooding, but also at how to address the causes of climate change.

"All parties must look beyond the short term, and demonstrate their commitment to creating a low-carbon economy through domestic decisions and international leadership," says the letter.
