

Tuesday, December 29, 2015

Financial Times • USA Ed1 • p. 4 • 749 words

Extreme weather causes chaos
around the globe

Climate change: Rising temperatures

By Clive Cookson, Science Editor

 Scientists say man-made warming is amplifying natural patterns and El Niño effect

Two weeks after the Paris agreement on an international effort to fight climate change, extreme weather across the world is illustrating the impact that global warming is having, in combination with natural climatic variability.

Record December warmth is affecting large areas of the northern hemisphere, including most of Europe and the eastern US, while severe flooding hits places from Paraguay to the north of England.

Climate scientists pin responsibility for the exceptional weather on man-made warming, combined with random variability and El Niño - the natural heating of the tropical Pacific Ocean that occurs every few years.

David Rooke, an expert on flooding and deputy chief executive of the UK Environment Agency, said yesterday that flood preparations needed a "complete rethink" as a result of climate change. "We are in a period of known extremes and we are moving into a period of unknown extremes," he told BBC Radio.

The World Meteorological Organisation expects the global average temperature this year to hit a record high - "the symbolic and significant milestone of 1C above the pre-industrial era" - as carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases resulting from human activities trap more heat in the atmosphere. The Paris accord called on governments to contain global warming to 1.5C, with 2C as an outside limit.

The UK Met Office says the world is likely to become even warmer next year, barring an event such as a large volcanic eruption that pumps cooling dust into the atmosphere. Professor Adam Scaife, head of long-range prediction at the Met Office, said: "This forecast suggests that by the end of 2016 we will have seen three record, or near-record years in a row for global temperatures."

Scientists resist making a direct causal link between global warming and individual weather events but say climate change tends to increase the intensity of rainstorms because a warmer atmosphere contains more moisture and energy. There is 4 per cent more moisture in the air over the world's oceans today than in the 1970s, according to Peter Stott, head of climate monitoring at the UK Met Office.

December's warmth in relation to long-term averages has been remarkable in the UK. In England the mean temperature of 9.5C is not only 5.1C above average but 2C above the previous record set in 1934 - usually monthly temperature records are beaten by a small fraction of a degree.

Researchers at Oxford university and the Royal Netherlands Meteorological Institute (KNMI) calculated that climate change had made the floods associated with Storm Desmond this month 40 per cent more likely. The storm dropped 34cm of rain on Honister Pass in Cumbria over a 24-hour period, a UK record.

Throughout Europe, ski resorts are lamenting the lack of snow. It is so mild that even snow-making machines are unable to whiten the bare brown pistes; freezing levels in the Alps have been as high as 3,000 metres. St Anton in Austria has had to cancel its Skiing World Cup races scheduled for January.

While the scientific link between El Niño and weather is weak in north-west Europe, the impact of warm waters in the Pacific is much stronger in the southern hemisphere. Parts of South America are always susceptible to heavy and prolonged rainfall during El Niño. Even so, the extent of current flooding in Paraguay and surrounding areas of Argentina, Uruguay and Brazil is said to be the worst for decades, with more than 100,000 people forced to evacuate.

In the US the weather story combines record-breaking warmth in the east with storms that have killed at least 43 people in the Midwest and southern states in less than a week. Most remarkable have been some lethal tornadoes, particularly in Texas; such ferocious twisters are more characteristic of spring and summer than December, when there is normally less tornado-generating energy in the atmosphere.

The next demonstration of the storm-generating power of a warm, wet atmosphere will be felt across the British Isles and north-west Europe over the next couple of days.

"We expect stormy conditions to return midweek," said Andy Page, Met Office chief meteorologist, "as an explosively deepening area of low pressure passes to the north-west of the UK."

That "explosively deepening" depression, dubbed Storm Frank, is expected to cause further flooding in northern England, Wales and Scotland on Wednesday, as well as severe gales.

