  Monday, February 17, 2014  
Financial Times • Asia Ed1 • p. 2 • 317 words 
 Kerry calls for action on climate threat  By Pilita Clark in London, Ben Bland in Jakarta and Clive Cookson in Chicago 

 John Kerry , US secretary of state,  has issued a plea for action on global warming, calling it as big a threat as terrorism and "perhaps the world's most fearsome weapon of mass destruction".  Speaking in Jakarta after the US and China announced fresh strides on jointly tackling climate change before a global summit next year, Mr Kerry hit out at "a tiny minority of shoddy scientists" and "extreme ideologues" trying to hijack the debate.  His comments come amid a spate of extreme weather events around the world, from heavy weekend snowfalls that killed a dozen people in Japan, to relentless US snow and ice storms; the hottest January on record in parts of Brazil and severe winter flooding in Britain.  The weather patterns have galvanised debate about the influence of global warming, with political figures such as Ed Miliband, the UK opposition leader, saying it has become a national security issue, while climate sceptics continue to question the science. Mr Kerry likened such views to those held by people who used to insist the earth was flat. "The science is unequivocal, and those who refuse to believe it are simply burying their heads in the sand," he said.  Countries are preparing to negotiate a  firm global deal to curb warming at UN negotiations in Paris late next year. World leaders failed to achieve such an agreement at the Copenhagen summit in 2009.  The US and China will play a decisive role in the Paris outcome as they account for about 40 per cent of the carbon emissions linked to warming.  Mr Kerry said the US and China had made progress on a range of measures, including cutting heavy-duty vehicle emissions, capturing and storing carbon, and collecting data.  While precise details remain unclear, he said: "I'm pleased to tell you that the leaders of China agree that it is time to pursue a cleaner path forward." He added: "We have hopes that it will help to set an example for global leadership."  The US administration's credibility on climate change faces a big test in the coming months as it decides whether to approve the Keystone XL pipeline opposed by many environmentalists to bring Canadian crude to US refineries.  Mr Kerry's comments came as scientists studying the jet stream winds said the bad weather that has battered the US and UK this winter may persist for longer in future in patterns lasting weeks or months.   