The Guardian (UK) Monday, August 3, 2015 - 16:17 UTC -0400Population growth and climate change: fewer people does not mean more CO2Your editorial’s argument about a causal link between slowing population growth and increased economic growth ( Fewer people means more carbon: the population paradox, 3 August) is dangerously out of date.In its 2014 report, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change showed how the reduction through efficiency of CO 2emissions from fossil fuels was wiped out by population increase, the real paradox being why it then offered pages of energy policy advice, but not a word on population. Could it be that the IPCC – and you – are blinded by the logic that regards economic growth as more important than carbon emissions and misery for lots of women and children?Think what you are saying to a poor woman in India or Africa, where populations are on track to double soon. “Carry on with your multiple unwanted pregnancies, so long as you stay poor. Your capability (information and materials) to choose when to have children must wait until ‘economic reform’ brings industrialisation – with luck that won’t destroy your environment first.”And you wrongly assume a perfect market for reproductive choice in rich countries, where about four in 10 pregnancies are unplanned, four children are seen as a symbol of enviable wealth (think Beckhams), and in the UK, for example, the quality of reproductive health education and provision is not very good.The 2015 UN population statistics note that in 43 countries – including Russia, China and Germany – populations are already declining. An economic logic of fewer people consuming less stuff is beginning to emerge in practice, free of troublesome paradoxes about conserving the environment and respecting women’s desire to manage their own fertility. Moreover, it reduces the likelihood of social and economic meltdowns, which are certain if we carry on as we are.Sara ParkinPatron, Population Matters• It seems obvious that the world’s increasing population presents serious problems in three ways, as you point out in your editorial. The number of people is increasing, people are living longer, and they expect a rising standard of living. It is too strong to say, as you do, that the linkage of climate change to world population is “flawed” – inadequate certainly, but it is not an irrelevant parameter. In addition to the consequences of population on climate change, the competition for limited resources (land, minerals, energy, fresh water, fairness, etc) will surely create serious risks of conflict. Conflicts rarely solve anything, but damage resources and degrade societies. Allowing the world population to continue to rise is storing up problems. I hope such aspects will feature in the Paris meeting on climate change in December. We in the developed world hence have a responsibility to reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and make the technology available worldwide. We also need to modify our lifestyles to reduce impact on world resources – and find that one can still enjoy life.John ChubbCheltenham, Gloucestershire• I was surprised to read your editorial claiming that “fewer people means more carbon”. What absolute nonsense. This is a post hoc fallacy. Obviously increased pollution in a country is not a function of the reduction of the population of that country. What is true is that countries with richer populations tend to pollute more, generally as a result of their populations consuming more products, travelling more etc. Another by-product of the increased wealth of a country is that population growth in that country tends to slow down – when health improves it’s no longer necessary to assume that only a percentage of one’s children will reach old age. To claim that fewer people means more carbon is akin to claiming that the rooster crows immediately before sunrise, therefore the rooster causes the sun to rise.Christopher LascellesLondon• Your editorial fails to recognise climate change’s complexity. Carbon per capita may well increase with economic prosperity, but carbon emissions are still a function of total population and are increasing fastest in underdeveloped countries. Every extra mouth has to be fed, and agriculture is one of the main producers of greenhouse gas emissions.Furthermore it isn’t just carbon dioxide that contributes to climate change. Methane, generated from raising livestock as well as rice fields, is the second most important greenhouse gas. It has risen from 500 parts per billion (ppb) to about 1,800 ppb and is currently increasing by 6 ppb per annum. This is not all due to agriculture, but to argue that population growth will not impact on   is highly misleading.Dr Robin Russell-JonesStoke Poges, Buckinghamshire• You suggest that retaining high fertility rates in the poorest countries would help prevent climate change by slowing industrialisation. But, even if this analysis were correct, what cost would such a policy have to those living in those countries? The idea of sensible population policies is to allow the poorest to move out of poverty while minimising the effect on climate change.Martin EarlLondon• Your conclusion that “focusing on population growth could actually accelerate the global environmental problems it claims to address” could better include David Attenborough’s published view that “there is no major problem facing our planet that would not be easier to solve if there were fewer people and no problem that does not become harder – and ultimately impossible to solve – with ever more”.