The Guardian (UK) Sunday, May 24, 2015 - 14:19 UTC -0400Why the University of Edinburgh must divest from all fossil fuels nowIt was wrong for American Energy Alliance and ExxonMobil to claim that the oil and coal industries are helping people living in poverty in the global south, and it is wrong for Professor Charlie Jeffery to do so too ( Why the University of Edinburgh will not divest from all fossil fuels, theguardian.com, 12 May). The world’s poorest people are already facing hardship from climate-related effects on food supply and water.Pitting fossil fuel divestment against the world’s poor is a cynical move which ignores the fact that the world’s poorest people are being impacted most severely by the effects of global warming, and will continue to suffer its worst impacts over the coming years, while many of the governments in the global south are the most vociferous opponents of the fossil fuel industry, and the strongest advocates for binding reductions targets.Professor Jeffery rightly identifies coal and tar sands as two of the worst polluting forms of fossil fuel energy. To avoid catastrophic climate change by keeping the global temperature rise below 2C, the fossil fuel industry needs to leave 82% of today’s coal reserves in the ground and Canada’s tar sands must go almost untouched. The University of Edinburgh’s decision to continue investment is indicative of its failure to recognise both these stark facts and the urgency of the issue. Professor Jeffery’s statement also makes no mention of the human rights, increasing poverty or ill-health of communities on the frontline of fossil fuel extraction. Will the university continue to invest in fossil fuel companies whose ongoing activities devastate communities such as those in Niger delta and Alberta, Canada ?In particular, Professor Jeffery states that continued investment is justified where companies are investing in technology that helps address the effects of climate change and reduce carbon emissions. This condition is vague, weak and ineffective given the energy mix present in most fossil fuel companies’ portfolios. Will Edinburgh continue to invest in companies spending a small fraction of their wealth on reducing emissions, while currently spending billions on exploiting tar sands and coal in new projects with shelf-lives of decades? Does investing in research into renewable energy that then sits unused in a closed archive meet this condition?As part of the climate justice movement, we absolutely agree that it is rich countries that have both the responsibility and the capacity to phase out fossil fuels first and fastest. But the interests of poorer countries are best served by keeping global temperature increases below 2C, and that means fossil fuels must remain in the ground. Poorer countries need to be supported in their efforts to leapfrog the fossil-fuel-driven development model that created wealth in the global north, but which also caused the climate crisis we now face. That’s why it is so essential that funds currently invested in destructive fossil fuel projects be urgently diverted to developing renewable energy systems that can provide safe, sustainable energy for people everywhere, and as part of a Just Transition into dignified, well-paying alternative work for those currently employed in fossil fuel industries.