The New York Times Late Edition - FinalThe Arts/Cultural, Wednesday, September 30, 2015, p. C 1Marketing a Harrowing Message With HopeBy CARA BUCKLEYTwo movies on similar missions are opening within weeks of each other this season, "Racing Extinction" and "This Changes Everything," both exploring the devastation humanity has wrought on the natural world.Yet rather than focusing only on what is dying and lost, both films offer messages of hope, profiling people who have helped stop, animal by animal, acre by acre, the pillaging of wildlife and land.The question is whether people will go see the films. Accounts of global warming tend to leave those who aren't apathetic paralyzed and depressed, and tales of animal cruelty and extinction can be too harrowing to bear. The director of "Racing Extinction," Louie Psihoyos, who won an Oscar for his 2009 documentary, "The Cove," about the annual dolphin slaughter in Japan, said people still tell him they lack the mettle to see that film. And Naomi Klein, who adapted "This Changes Everything," based on her book of the same name, said a film salesman, whom she declined to name, told her that he would market the movie only if there was no reference to climate change in the marketing."If you beat people over the head with shame, guilt and despair, you get exactly what you expect -- people turn away and try to forget about it," said Shawn Heinrichs, a photographer and an activist featured in "Racing Extinction." He added: "The last thing people want to do is take on a heavy dose of depression. We have to recognize that."Cognizant of such aversion, the teams behind each film, which share the same distributor, developed similar plans: target the people most passionate about what's at stake, and bank on them to draw in others."We want to make sure we approach the core audience directly," said Richard Abramowitz, whose company, Abramorama, is distributing both films. "Once we've gotten their attention, we work with them to activate others and spread the word."As he did with "The Cove," Mr. Psihoyos sought to create a thriller, using undercover spies to expose animal traffickers while highlighting acts of environmentalist derring-do. "Racing Extinction" got a head start with its message this summer when the director and his collaborators projected images of endangered animals onto the Empire State Building.The film opened theatrically on Sept. 18, and an awards run is being eyed. (It helps that Mr. Psihoyos has name recognition from his Oscar win.) But whether "Racing Extinction" has a broader impact may not be clear until Dec. 2, when the Discovery Channelplans to broadcast it in prime time in about 220 countries and territories.John Hoffman, a former HBO producer who is now executive vice president for documentaries and specials at Discovery, said the channel's executives decided to throw their weight behind the film shortly after its premiere at the Sundance Film Festival in January."We have aired things globally, but never as this sort of call to action," Mr. Hoffman said, adding: "We have to make this a global event. We have to say to the world, 'For a moment, we have to stop, and look at the issues' " that the film raises. "Our aim is that everybody in the world should know this film is on."The Dec. 2 date is strategic: COP21, the United Nations climate change conference, is to be held in Paris from Nov. 30 through Dec. 11.Similarly, Ms. Klein and Avi Lewis, her husband and the film's director, hustled to get "This Changes Everything" out well ahead of COP21. "Working back from Paris has been the orienting goal here," said Janet Brown, chief executive of FilmBuff, which is releasing the film with Abramorama and handling its worldwide distribution.The film focuses on grass-roots movements that thwarted oil companies and communities that embraced renewable energy. Ms. Klein and Mr. Lewis, both longtime activist journalists, began building support for the documentary when she started researching her book about five years ago. They hired an outreach director immediately, and worked with groups like 350.org, Greenpeace and Friends of the Earth to plan screenings. Such organizations can draw in audiences that may be further galvanized by what they see, Ms. Klein said."Films don't change the world, movements do," she added, pointing to the momentum that the film "Gasland" gave to the anti-fracking movement."This Changes Everything," which will be released theatrically on Friday, also had showings in a dozen cities last Saturday, including one in Amsterdam, where it was projected on a coal-fired power station. The film will also be available on iTunes on Oct. 20. "We believe that to bring a new narrative into a cluttered culture, you need multiple points of entry," Mr. Lewis said.Mr. Abramowitz, the distributor, said he did not think "Racing Extinction" and "This Changes Everything" would cannibalize each other's audiences, and Mr. Lewis agreed. "We believe the more documentaries on the subject, the better," he said.The "Racing Extinction" promoters also made sure they had an infrastructure -- they called it an "impact campaign" -- in place before the film opened, ready to give answers to viewers who ask, "What can I do?" They teamed with Paul Allen, the Microsoft co-founder, and his company Vulcan to push for laws banning the trafficking of endangered species, among other initiatives, and exhorted, via social media and a website, supporters to do the same.Mr. Psihoyos also chose an image from one of his projections -- a manta ray, glowing on a tall building -- for the film's poster, certainly far more beckoning than any picture of the large-scale marine killing that the film explores. (The filmmakers said they also left far more upsetting images on the cutting room floor.) He did the same with "The Cove," adorning DVD covers with images of frolicking dolphins.It's all part of the effort to get people to see the movie and then take an action. The message Mr. Psihoyos is propounding is that each voice and each act, no matter how small, counts: Outrage generated by "The Cove" helped reduce dolphin killings in Japan to 6,000 a year from 23,000."We set up a chorus of people doing amazing things so at the end, people want to join us, rather than get full of despair," Mr. Psihoyos said. "We try to bookend everything we do with hope."