The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, April 16, 2014, p. 4National Trust calls for urgent action to save Britain's battered coastlineA CLEAR national strategy is "urgently needed" to help "future-proof" coastal areas from rising sea levels and extreme weather, according to a report by the National Trust.The charity, one of the UK's biggest coastal owners, said many of its sites had been "battered" by storms and "hit hard" by high tides during the winter.Birling Gap, part of the Seven Sisters chalk cliffs in East Sussex, experienced the equivalent of seven years of erosion in a matter of months, leaving its café and shop teetering yards from the edge. Part of the footpath down to the golden sands of Rhossili on Gower, in South Wales, which was recently voted the UK's best beach, was washed away by storms.The National Trust said it had been forced to "fasttrack" decisions over how to adapt coastal areas in the months ahead, rather than the years or decades. Simon Pryor, natural environment director at the trust, called on the Government to ensure that strategies to future-proof the coastline are implemented."There is a natural inclination to want to defend the coastline with concrete, but our coastline is dynamic and the forces of nature that have formed it are part of its beauty," he said. "Hard defences will always have their place, but the winter storms that hit many coastal places hard have provided a valuable reminder that they have a limited life."Where we can, we need to give natural processes that have formed our coast the space to work, and create areas where the coastline can realign as the sea levels rise. Natural habitats such as sand dunes and salt marshes can act as buffer zones that absorb the impact of storms and very high tides."Dr Pryor said a report, Shifting Shores - adapting to change, published last Friday by the Intergovernmental Panel on   (IPCC) reinforced the urgency of having a "workable plan" for long-term coastline management. He said there was a "clear need" to reduce greenhouse gas emissions to avoid further accelerating climate change and the risk of more dramatic damage."Communities living on the coast, landowners, government agencies and local and central government need to work together now to find solutions based around an adaptation approach to help future-proof the coastline," Dr Pryor said."Much of the framework to make this happen is in place, but government needs to act now to make sure that it's implemented and the support is there for coastal communities to begin planning to adapt."The National Trust cares for 742 miles of coast in England, Wales and Northern Ireland.