 Thursday, August 27, 2009 260 mots

Estimated cost of climate adaptation soars
By Fiona Harvey, Environment Correspondent

Adapting to the damage caused by climate change will cost hundreds of billions of dollars a year, a group of scientists said on Thursday - putting the price tag far higher than previously estimated.

The worldwide cost of adaptation - including better flood defences, improving transport infrastructure and better resilience to drought - would probably reach sums in the region of $140bn to $210bn a year by 2030, said the group of climate experts brought together by Imperial College London and the London-based International Institute for Environment and Development.

These sums are far in excess of the $100bn (€70bn, £61bn) a year that Gordon Brown, the UK's prime minister, has said rich countries should be prepared to spend by 2020 on helping poor nations adapt to global warming and cut their greenhouse gas emissions.

Funding from the rich to the developing world to assist with adaptation is proving a big sticking point in the negotiations to forge a new global treaty on climate change, set to culminate this December at the Copenhagen summit. Poor countries say the developed world is failing in its responsibilities.

The scientists acknowledged, however, that studies were so far incomplete and required much more work before a more accurate picture of the costs could be presented.

"These estimates are based on studies of a selection of sectors," said Martin Parry, lead author of the report, entitled Assessing the Costs of Adaptation to Climate Change. "The true cost is probably much greater."

Climate change is expected to wreak havoc on many parts of the globe, particularly hitting poor countries, which will suffer declines in agricultural productivity and whose infrastructure may be overwhelmed by the need to cope with more frequent and intense storms.

Rich countries will not be immune. Buildings will need to be overhauled to cope with the expected increased incidence of droughts, storms and floods. Water and sanitation, electricity and transport networks will need to be improved.
