 Editorial, Wednesday, July 1, 2009 356 mots, p. A 32

EDITORIAL

Climate in the Senate

The House's approval last week of a bill capping greenhouse gases was a remarkable achievement, almost unthinkable six months ago. Yet all of the hard work -- the hearings, the negotiating, the arm-twisting -- will add up to zero if the Senate cannot be persuaded to do the same, and preferably better. The country would be left with an outdated energy policy and the planet would be stuck with steadily rising emissions.

The Senate will not be an easy sell. It has rejected less ambitious climate bills before. While 60 filibuster-proof votes are needed, only 45 Senators mostly Democrats, can be counted as yes or probably yes. There are 23 fence-sitters and very little Republican support.

Despite federal studies suggesting that the costs to businesses, consumers and the economy will be minimal, the Republican leadership continues to claim that the bill will cause an unacceptable rise in energy prices.

Democratic leaders should nevertheless resist calls to weaken the targets on emissions reductions. The House bill is itself a compromise, and a weaker Senate bill could be worse than no bill at all.

The Senate should also remove the House version's more glaring defects. Among these is a provision -- inserted at the insistence of the farm lobby -- that would postpone a systematic accounting of the carbon emissions from biofuels like corn ethanol. The farm lobby and its allies on the Agriculture Committee are clearly nervous that the accounting would cast corn ethanol in an unfavorable light.

Another flaw is a last-minute provision imposing a mandatory tariff on imports from countries that do not adopt comparable systems for limiting global warming gases. The original bill would have left that to the president's discretion. The mandatory tariff would not take effect until 2020, but the provision could fan already dangerous protectionist sentiments overseas. The Senate should restore the president's discretionary power.

There is much to commend in the House bill. It seeks a 17 percent reduction in greenhouse gases from 2005 levels by 2020 and an 80 percent reduction by midcentury -- the minimum, according to most scientists, required to avert the worst consequences of climate change. The bill also provides money for developing more energy-efficient vehicles and buildings and other steps that would provide even bigger and faster reductions in global warming emissions.

We hope for even better in the Senate. What there cannot be is backsliding. Global negotiations to replace the expiring Kyoto agreement on climate change resume in the fall. The world is waiting for the United States, after years of indifference, to take a strong leadership role. So is the American public.
Aussi paru dans
