 WORLD NEWS, Saturday, May 23, 2009 450 mots, p. 5

Obama passes first hurdle in global warming battle
By Edward Luce in Washington

The US Congress has taken its first big step towards passing a cap and trade bill to tackle global warming but the proposed legislation faces a tough fight to be passed by the Senate.

A vote on Thursday night in the key House committee on energy and commerce set out proposals for a bill to reduce US carbon emissions to 17 per cent below 2005 levels by 2020 and by 83 per cent by 2050.

Barack Obama, president, who is pushing Congress for a bill to sign before the global climate talks in Copenhagen in December, described the committee vote as "historic" even though it has yet to be passed by either chamber.

In his statement, Mr Obama reflected the often messy compromises that were necessary to bring along the so-called "brown Democrats" from the mid-west and south whose input drastically changed the bill from the original version put forward by the president.

Mr Obama campaigned on a promise to introduce a 100 per cent auction for all carbon permits. Under the House compromise, more than 80 per cent of the -permits would be given away to electricity utilities, energy-intensive manufacturers, car companies and the oil refining sector.

"The bill is historic for what it achieves, providing clean energy incentives that encourage innovation while recognising the concerns of sensitive industries and regions," said Mr Obama.

Some environmental groups applauded the measure which they said reflected the best possible deal in the political climate. In recent polls, tackling climate change has dropped down the agenda of concerns for ordinary Americans.

"You should not let the perfect be the enemy of the good," said one environmental advocate. "If you look at the big picture, this would put a cap on carbon emissions, which is the main purpose."

However, the bill, which is likely to be put to a full House vote before the summer recess in late July, faces continuing criticisms from both left and right.

On the left, environmentalists say the decision to give away, rather than auction, most carbon trading permits would blunt the price signals needed to persuade consumers to change their behaviour.

Under one estimate, the permits given to local electricity distribution companies would result in a $750bn (€534bn, £471bn) subsidy to consumers between now and 2030 when the system would have moved to a full auction. Proponents of the bill say that step is essential to win public support by avoiding sharp rises in the electricity bills of consumers at a time when the economy is -contracting.

The bill is also designed to avoid the windfall that European energy companies received by ensuring that the value of the free permits is passed on to the consumer, rather than producers. On the right, Republicans say they will continue to oppose the bill. Only one Republican voted for it, which passed the committee by a majority of 36 to 22.

A number of influential Democrats expressed doubts about the bill's merits. "This stuff is going no place in the Senate," said Collin Peterson, the Democratic chairman of the House agriculture committee.

Charlie Rangel, chairman of the House ways and means committee, which also has jurisdiction over the bill, hinted he might not co-operate unless healthcare reform had first been enacted. Mr Rangel argues that a carbon tax would be more efficient.
