 Monday, October 19, 2009 540 mots

Concession raises hopes for climate deal
By Fiona Harvey, Environment Correspondent

Developed countries are preparing to relent on their demand that developing countries agree to long-term cuts in greenhouse gas emissions in a concession that could form the basis of a global deal on climate change.

 

The demand was one of five key elements rich countries wanted for a deal at the international climate change summit in Copenhagen in December. But major emerging economies, led by China and India, refused to sign up to it, worrying it could be used to force large and so far unquantified emission cuts on them in the future.

Governments on both sides of the Atlantic are now softening their call for a global target of halving emissions by 2050, in an attempt to build a consensus around a less ambitious deal in Copenhagen.

Todd Stern, Mr Obama's special envoy for climate change, in London on Monday for talks with the world's 17 biggest emitters, hinted at the softening stance: "Our view at the G8 in July was that there ought to be both a developed country number and a worldwide number - 80 per cent for developed countries, 50 per cent worldwide. We still think that."

But he added: "I don't know whether that is going to be included or not."

Gordon Brown, the UK prime minister, tried to galvanise other governments into action on Monday with a rallying call. "Success at Copenhagen is still within reach. But if we falter, the earth itself will be at risk," he told talks in London.

But speculation was growing over whether Barack Obama, US president, would attend the December conference.

Mr Stern said that climate change talks were treated by the US as ministerial meetings and only if progress was made to "warrant the attendance of leaders", would they consider Mr Obama attending.

Dropping the 2050 demand for a target date will make it easier to strike a deal in Copenhagen, as it will switch attention to how countries manage emissions in the next decade.

"Discussions on 2050 have been eating up time that could be more usefully spent determining what we do before we're all dead," said one senior official involved in the talks.

Developed countries have already agreed to cut their emissions by 80 per cent by 2050, which will remain unchanged.

Ed Miliband, the UK secretary of state for climate change, also signalled that the 2050 goal was dispensable. He praised the actions developing countries such as China and India were taking to curb the growth of their emissions, and said these pledges for the next decade were paramount.

"The most important thing is mid-term actions. The 2050 targets are important but it's more important to have near-term targets," he said. "The actions China and India are taking for 2020 are absolutely central to a successful outcome ... What's important is that Chinese action for 2020 is made concrete in terms of quantified numbers."

The 2050 target is the second recent concession in the pre-Copenhagen talks. Developing countries have all but given up on attempts to get free access to rich countries' intellectual property.

Most developed countries, apart from the US, have also agreed to targets for cutting emissions by 2020, and emerging economies have pledged to curb their emissions.

There is still some disagreement - developing countries want tougher targets from rich countries, and rich countries in turn want emerging economies to make their commitments legally binding. But there are signs that a compromise could be reached. "There is a deal to be had," said Mr Stern.

The biggest remaining problem is over finance, which was the subject of Monday's discussions in London. Poor countries want aid from rich nations if they are to quantify the actions they will take on emissions in a binding deal.

Yvo de Boer, the UN's top climate change official, told the Financial Times this was "a potential deal-breaker". He encouraged rich countries to do more. "This has nothing to do with signing blank cheques. It's about building trust and showing that you are serious [about climate change]."
