 WORLD NEWS, Thursday, February 4, 2010 270 mots, p. 6

Climate panel's arduous task

Q&A
By Fiona Harvey, Environment Correspondent

What is the IPCC? The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, a forum of the world's leading global warming experts, was convened by the United Nations in 1988 to draw up a report summarising climate science. Why is it under fire? In early January, the New Scientist, a British magazine, reported that a claim in the 2007 IPCC report on climate change - that the Himalaya's glaciers could lose most of their mass by 2035 - was based on a report by WWF, the environmental group, which in turn was based on the New Scientist's account of a 1999 interview with an Indian glaciologist. The expert in question did not repeat the claim in any peer-reviewed study. To cite such a source for such a dramatic claim was considered a bad mistake.

Why does its process take so long? Several hundred scientists are chosen to be lead authors who draw on the work of thousands of other scientists. The erroneous claim that the Himalayan glaciers would disappear by 2035 was one line in the 2007 report, which ran to about 1,000 pages. Does that mean that the IPCC's conclusions could be based on faulty data that have not been rigorously analysed? It's not so simple. Reports from many climate sceptics are included.

The most important part of the IPCC process is taking these diverse views and boiling them down.

First, they are condensed to a technical summary, which is then reviewed and distilled into a short summary for policymakers. This is the crucial document - the SPM is presented to governments to inform negotiations and its conclusions are generally supported by various data.

Is that it? Then, all governments are invited to send a delegation to discuss the SPM. Only when every word is approved by every government can it be published. Critics say this produces a bland document, but it is also one no government can disown. If the process is so arduous, why have mistakes slipped through? The contested claims come from the wider report, not the SPM.
