 G8 SUMMIT, Thursday, July 9, 2009 298 mots, p. 3

China's departure puts cloud over climate change deal
By Fiona Harvey in London, Guy Dinmore in L'Aquila and George Parker in Rome

The early departure of Hu Jintao, president of China, from the Group of Eight summit yesterday dealt a serious blow to the prospects of a strong agreement on climate change.

Leaders of 16 of the world's biggest greenhouse gas emitting countries are meeting today at the request of Barack Obama, US president.

He called the meeting, called the Major Economies Forum, which he is co-chairing with Silvio Berlusconi, the Italian prime minister, in order to break the deadlock in climate change talks, aimed at producing a successor to the Kyoto protocol at a conference in Copenhagen in December.

Yesterday, the G8 produced a communiqué resolving to try to hold global temperature rises to no more than 2°C above pre-industrial levels, which scientists regard as the limit of safety.

This was the first time such a target has been formally adopted in a leading international forum.

However, in order to curb temperature rises to this extent, scientists calculate that global emissions must be at least halved by 2050. A target to this effect was included in the draft communiqué, but it had to be dropped after China - the world's biggest emitter - failed to agree to it.

The absence of Mr Hu will make further progress difficult. One of the aims of the MEF was to bring leaders of the main emitting countries together for the first time to discuss climate change, so that they could allow their environment ministers - who attend the UN negotiations - greater latitude in making a deal. But China was reluctant to sign up to the 2050 target without first gaining key concessions.

Anantha Guruswamy, Greenpeace programme director, said China and India had refused to sign up because the G8 club of rich nations had not shown leadership by putting forward proposals for financing emissions cuts and measures to adapt to climate change in poor countries. "It is up to Obama to show leadership on this," Mr Guruswamy said.

"There is a real danger the G8 text will go backwards as a result of this."

Beijing and Delhi also want rich countries to agree far higher targets on cutting emissions by 2020 than any have yet come up with.

The 16 countries in the MEF produce 80 per cent of the world's carbon emissions. The European Union and Denmark, as host of the Copenhagen conference, are also invited to its meetings.
