 WORLD NEWS, Monday, December 14, 2009 493 mots, p. 8

Schwarzenegger urges US to lead climate battle
By Matthew Garrahan in Los Angeles

California governor tells cities to actObama's struggle wins sympathy

Arnold Schwarzenegger has urged the White House to emulate California in taking a lead in the fight against climate change, saying "it would be good for the whole world . . . if the US becomes the power behind the movement".

The California governor told the Financial Times in an interview that he could sympathise with Barack Obama's struggles in securing backing in Congress for national emissions targets. But Mr Schwarzenegger added "it would be incredible if America makes a commitment" that helps secure a global framework on climate change.

"America within 10 years could get 20 per cent of its power needs from renewables," he said. "We have sun, wind - you can even now get oil from algae. There is a green revolution [in California] but the whole US could be leading like that."

Mr Schwarzenegger, who flies to the UN climate change conference in Copenhagen this week, also called on cities, states and other "sub-national" governments, urging them not to wait for a binding deal before taking action to curb emissions.

"International agreements, as critical as they are, will never do enough," he said he would tell the conference this week, when he will also meet Michael Bloomberg, the mayor of New York, and Boris Johnson, London's mayor.

"The world's governments alone cannot make the progress that is needed on global climate change . . . they need the cities, the states, the provinces, the regions," said Mr Schwarz-enegger. "California is the eighth largest economy in the world and also America's trendsetter, so what we do has consequences. And we in California do not believe, and we do not behave, as if progress has to wait for Washington or Beijing or Kyoto."

Angered by the refusal of the Bush administration to take meaningful action against global warming, the Republican Mr Schwarz-enegger became one of the leading advocates for the environmental movement after introducing tough emissions and renewable energy targets in California.

In September, Mr Obama's administration said the US Environmental Protection Agency would adopt a vehicle emissions standard closely modelled on a standard first introduced by Mr Schwarzenegger in California. The state was also involved in the launch of China's first greenhouse gas emissions registry this year.

He told the Financial Times he could "relate" to Mr Obama's struggles in securing national emissions targets.

The US president, who is also due in Copenhagen this week, is backing new EPA rules after failing to push legislative targets through Congress. "[Mr Obama] believes in cap and trade and he believes in reducing greenhouse gases," said Mr Schwarzenegger. "He knew that Congress wouldn't ban anything - he's stuck on healthcare. But I think [going through the EPA] is a wise thing."

Mr Schwarzenegger hinted that the president would need the support of the US Chamber of Commerce, which opposes the EPA move, to secure a meaningful deal.

The California governor has become an environmental standard bearer for the Republican party, which is split on the merits of curbing emissions. Sarah Palin, John McCain's running mate in the 2008 presidential election, has attacked cap and trade and questioned any link between man-made emissions and global warming.

Mr Schwarzenegger said: "You have to ask: what was she trying to accomplish? Is she really interested in this subject or is she interested in her career and in winning the nomination [for president]?"

The governor also addressed leaked "Climategate" e-mails that indicated some scientists had been selective in their use of data to back up research on global warming. "I understand there are mistakes made in the environmental community but I see [the impact of global warming] first hand, with the fires we have in California and the lack of water in the state," he said.
