 Saturday, January 23, 2010 424 mots

UN climate specialist defends glacier report
By Amy Kazmin in New Delhi

The chief of the Nobel Prize winning United Nations climate change panel admitted on Saturday that its dire warning that Himalayan glaciers could disappear by 2035 was "an error," but said the threat posed by global warming could not be ignored.

Seeking to quell a controversy with great resonance in his native India, Rajendra Pachauri, chief of the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, admitted there was no hard science to back the "regrettable" claim that Himalayan glaciers could disappear within three decade if global warming goes unchecked.

The claim was part of the wide-ranging 2007 report produced by the IPCC, which includes the world's leading climate change scientists and advises governments on policy to deal with global warming.

"There's been this error, but that in no way detracts from the value of the report or the impact it has had," Mr Pachauri told journalists in Delhi. "Rational people see the larger picture and are not going to be distracted by this one error."

The pace of Himalayan glacier melt has been a contentious issue in India, which, along with China, depends heavily on what some refer to as "the Water Towers of Asia" to feed its major rivers, including the Ganges.

Jairam Ramesh, India's environment minister, has been openly disputing the IPCC's doomsday predictions on Himalayan glaciers, arguing that there was no evidence to support what it called misleading claims that they could disappear within decades.

In November, Mr Ramesh's ministry released a report that concluded that some Himalayan glaciers were indeed receding but not a pace that was "historically alarming".

Mr Pachauri criticised the ministry's report as '"schoolboy science".

However, the spotlight fell on the IPCC last week, after New Scientist, the popular magazine, traced the IPCC's warning of the potential disappearance of Himalayan glaciers by 2035 to its own 1999 article quoting an Indian glaciologist Syed Hasnain.

Mr Hasnain never offered such a time frame in any peer-reviewed literature, but the New Scientist reference was included in a report by the WWF, the environmental campaign group, from which it eventually found its way into a chapter of the IPCC report.

The IPCC issued a statement last week admitting that the estimates on the pace of glacier retreat, and the date for their likely disappearance was "poorly substantiated", though it re-affirmed its basic conclusion that global warming will lead to significant losses in glacier mass, resulting in water shortages.

Mr Pachauri said on Saturday that the IPCC panel will be more rigorous in its scrutiny of all data used for its next assessment report, for which preparation has begun and which is due in four years. "Our procedures are very robust, very solid, but we have to make sure we are implementing the procedures," he said. "Reasonable people will continue to repose their faith in the IPCC."

Mr Pachauri's admission comes as environment ministers from India, China, Brazil and South Africa are meeting in New Delhi on Sunday to discuss how to move forward on creating a new international treaty on climate change after the disappointment at Copenhagen.
