 WORLD NEWS, Wednesday, May 27, 2009 323 mots, p. 5

Chu aims to seize climate initiative
By Clive Cookson and Fiona Harvey in London

The US remains determined to lead the world to a new global deal on climate change, Steven Chu, the energy secretary, said yesterday.

Even if China and other developing countries are reluctant to make commitments at December's UN climate change conference in Copenhagen, "President Obama has made it clear that the US should act first," Mr Chu said. "Using China as a reason not to act is no longer an option."

Mr Chu, who won the Nobel Physics Prize in 1997, was speaking to journalists after arriving in London for a meeting to discuss climate change with more than 20 fellow Nobel laureates and dozens of other experts.

The London meeting - hosted by the Prince of Wales and Royal Society, and organised by Cambridge University and Germany's Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research - is expected to close tomorrow with a strong declaration of the need for action against global warming, ahead of the Copenhagen conference.

Although the US would not use China as an excuse for inaction, Mr Chu said he was optimistic the Chinese would act to curb emissions of carbon dioxide, the greenhouse gas most responsible for global warming.

"China's leadership knows well what the consequences of climate change will be for their country," he said.

Mr Chu is the son of Chinese immigrants to the US.

The energy secretary expressed confidence in the ability of the US to deliver "more than we have promised" in the fight against climate change.

"I have great faith in the innovation machinery of the US," he said, which would be mobilised by means of billions of dollars of federal spending in President Barack Obama's economic stimulus package.

"There is tremendous intellectual horsepower in the US, which is just beginning to come alive" on the issues of climate change, Mr Chu added. His remarks were made as a group of more than 500 business leaders worldwide called on governments to agree a strong global treaty on climate change to replace the Kyoto protocol, which expires in 2012. They urged governments to heed scientific advice and to set the target for emissions cuts at 28 per cent compared with business -as-usual levels by 2020.

Incentives for "a dramatic increase in financing low emissions technologies" and to encourage the deployment of existing low-carbon technologies should also be provided, they said. The business group was brought together by the Copenhagen Climate Council, a body set up to foster progress in negotiations for a new treaty to fight climate change which will culminate in a conference in December.
