 NATIONAL NEWS, Tuesday, December 2, 2008 593 mots, p. 4

Climate pledges to hit energy bills
By Fiona Harvey, Environment Correspondent

Homes and businesses will have to pay higher energy bills if Britain is to meet the estimated £15bn-a-year cost of its ambitious climate change commitments, ministers were told yesterday.

Household electricity costs could go up by more than 25 per cent by 2020 if greenhouse gas emissions are to be cut by a third from 1990 levels, said Lord Turner, chairman of the climate change committee.

In its first report yesterday, the government taskforce sketched out the world's first "carbon budgets" that ministers will be expected to follow when introducing new policies.

Lord Turner gave warning that the extra costs for the new technologies required could push 1.7m people into fuel poverty unless the government took steps - such as "social tariffs" on fuel use - to protect low-income groups and pensioners.

But he said: "The cost of not achieving the reductions . . . will be far greater [because of the threat posed by global warming]."

The proposed changes mean that, by the end of the next decade, most people buying new cars can expect them to be electric. Inefficient electrical appliances will be phased out, and new houses will be "zero-carbon".

In addition, thousands of new onshore wind turbines and a massive expansion of offshore wind farms will be required, and new nuclear power stations will be built.

"The budgets we have proposed are achievable, given available and developing technologies, and provided the policies in place are implemented and where necessary reinforced," Lord Turner said yesterday.

He described roads dominated by quiet electric vehicles with no traffic fumes, of houses kept warm with less energy through wide use use of insulation, of renewable energy sources installed in homes and factories, and where travellers used rail instead of air for short distances.

Lord Turner talked of the almost complete "decarbonisation" of the power sector by 2030, achieved through renewables and carbon capture and storage. Many businesses would face higher costs from having to buy carbon permits, predicted to reach £40 a tonne by 2020, from about £14 today.

Businesses not covered by the European Union's emissions trading scheme could also expect to be covered by other policies designed to reduce their emissions, mostly through encouraging energy efficiency.

The government would raise income by selling emissions permits to businesses, but would also face costs as the revenue from green taxes, such as fuel duty, fell as people moved away from fossil fuels.

It was "an extremely bold target", said Gareth Stace, head of environment policy at the EEF manufacturers' group. Britain could hit the target, but only "with a lot of government help directed at the real economy".

The report did not signal an end to new coal-fired power stations, as some campaigners had hoped. New coal-fired plants could go ahead, but only if they were fitted with carbon capture and storage technology when built, or retro-fitted with the technology from about 2020, the report said.

Ed Miliband, the energy and climate change secretary, said ministers would consider the report. If it is accepted, the chancellor is likely to have to present a "carbon budget" setting out how fiscal measures would affect emissions levels, alongside the national Budget from next spring.

How industry must adapt

Road transport Drivers will have to embrace electric vehicles if the UK is to meet its climate change targets, and the UK could become a manufacturing centre for this new breed of cars. More public transport will also be needed Aviation and shipping Policies may have to be introduced to encourage rail use over air. But it may be impossible to cut emissions from aviation and shipping by 80 per cent by 2050, even with new technologies and the use of biofuels Heavy industry Manufacturing sectors covered by the European Union's emissions trading scheme will pay higher prices for carbon permits - about £30 to £35 by 2020, according to the report. Most companies will see their allocation of permits cut, by about 1.7 per cent a year from 2013 to 2020 Construction More jobs in the short term in equipping homes with insulation. Homebuilders will also have to look to renewable energy technologies, which will be more expensive initially but repay costs over time Overall costs More than £15bn a year, increasing as the economy grows

Pollution rethink, Page 8 and supplement on climate change with today's FT
