 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR, Tuesday, December 8, 2009 266 mots, p. 10

Wrest control from climate change coalition to restore confidence

From Dr David Schofield.

Sir, Your already excellent coverage of the climate change debate may be yet further improved by more precision in the use of language. "Climate change" is not a science. It is a theme taken on by a single issue coalition of scientists, politicians and non-governmental organisations. Through the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC), this essentially self-selecting coalition has captured many important levers of political power, research funding and professional advancement.

"Peer review" is the process by which science moves forward within a scientific discipline. This term does not properly describe the pick and mix processes whereby a Noah's Ark of scientists and appointees select the information most supportive of their aims. "Climate change modelling" is the technical process of extrapolating historical data into the future by applying the cause and effect conclusions reached by the climate change coalition. It may be worth reflecting that modellers are often the poorer paid professional cousins of those formerly charged with regulating our financial markets.

I've watched the global warming debate develop since the ice age and acidification scares of the 1980s and have been waiting since then for a properly nuanced assessment of historical climate variability, a detailed review of the uncertainty around the impact of human activity; and the modelling of future consequences depending on a range of policy reactions. In the light of the University of East Anglia e-mail leaks, it appears I still have a long time to wait.

My positive proposal on how to rebuild confidence would be to take funding control from the hands of the climate change coalition, and ensure that the many respected sceptics in the scientific disciplines of oceanography, meteorology, atmospheric physics, astrophysics, glaciology and palaeontology have the right access to resources. Only then can the real processes of peer review start to inform properly public policy in this important area of human inquiry.

David Schofield, 