 WORLD NEWS, Monday, December 13, 2010 681 mots, p. 6

Cancún seen as 'beacon of hope' for climate deal
By Fiona Harvey, Environment Correspondent

News analysisThe UN talks broke through stalemate and secured steps towards a global accord, writes Fiona Harvey

A global agreement on climate change moved a step closer over the weekend as governments ended the UN Cancún talks with a series of accords on key elements of an overarching deal.

A "green fund" that will distribute money to help poor countries cope with climate change, a mechanism for international co-operation on low-carbon technology, and a way to help developing nations preserve their forests all emerged from the two weeks of negotiations in the Mexican resort of Cancún.

Countries will now continue to work towards agreement on other elements, such as the legal form a new deal could take, and the future of the Kyoto protocol - the current provisions of which expire in 2012.

The aim will be to draw up a full international deal to cover all of these elements, which could be agreed next year or in 2012.

Ministers, businesses and environmentalists welcom-ed the progress at the end of the talks, which had appeared mired in stalemate until the final hours of the conference. But some green campaigners said the advance was insufficient.

Hillary Clinton, the US secretary of state, hailed "meaningful progress".

"The Cancún agreements represent a balanced and significant step forward," said Mrs Clinton. "[We] will work with our friends and partners to keep the world focused on this urgent challenge and continue building on this progress."

Others welcomed the agreements as a vote of confidence in the UN negotiating process, which was in danger of failure after the chaos and discord that marked the end of last year's Copenhagen summit.

"Cancún has done its job - the beacon of hope has been reignited, and faith in the multilateral climate-change process to deliver results has been restored," said Christiana Figueres, the executive secretary of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, the world body's senior official on the issue.

"Nations have shown they can work together under a common roof, to reach consensus on a common cause.

"They have shown that consensus in a transparent and inclusive process can create opportunity for all."

The agreements reached in Cancún formalised the accord reached at Copenhagen, when developed and developing countries agreed for the first time to curb their greenhouse gas emissions. Owing to the refusal of a handful of countries - chiefly Venezuela, Bolivia and Sudan - to sign up, the Copenhagen Accord could not be formally adopted by the UN talks last year.

At Cancún, only Bolivia continued to hold out, but was sidelined.

This meant that the emissions-cutting targets that countries set out last year can now be formally recognised within the UN negotiating process.

Greg Barker, the UK climate change minister, said the deal would "send a strong signal of confidence to business investing billions in the new global green economy".

Businesses welcomed the outcome of the talks.

Ole Beier Sorensen, chairman of the Institutional Investors Group on Climate Change which represents investors holding $6,000bn in funds, said the deal "promises to put the international climate process back on track".

Mr Sorensen said: "It is an important step on the road towards a global deal and reassures investors that countries are committed to developing a low-carbon economy."

He added that governments must work with the private sector closely. "The lion's share of the investments necessary must come from private sources, so a continued public-private dialogue is critical to ensuring the policy environment supports in-vestment in low-carbon technologies."

Some green campaigners rejected the outcome of the talks, however, arguing that the emissions reductions that were set out would not be enough to stave off dangerous global warming, according to scientific estimates. Nnimmo Bassey, chair of Friends of the Earth International, called the Cancún agreements a "slap in the face" for developing countries.

The agreements

WHAT WAS AGREED

•A green fund. This will disburse money to poor countries to help them cope with the effects of global warming.

•A framework on low-carbon technology co-operation. Some developing countries wanted free access to intellectual property, which rich countries opposed. But a compromise should foster international co-operation.

•A framework to prevent deforestation. Poor countries will be able to seek funds to keep their existing forests standing and restore degraded areas.

•A continuation of the UN process. This had been in doubt owing to the chaos at Copenhagen. •Progress on how to monitor emissions.

STILL TO BE DONE

•Raising money for the green fund. The agreement over the fund covers only how the money will be distributed. Left hanging is how the $100bn a year can be raised.

•The legal form of a climate deal. If the Cancún agreements are to be turned into a full deal, countries must agree whether that should take the form of a legally binding treaty, along the lines of the Kyoto protocol, or a set of voluntary commitments.

•The future of the Kyoto protocol. Developing countries want rich nations to agree to a continuation of the protocol beyond 2012. Some rich countries would prefer a new agreement.
