 Friday, June 26, 2009 479 mots

Annan and Geldof launch climate campaign
By Tim Bradshaw in Cannes

Kofi Annan, the former secretary-general of the United Nations, and Bob Geldof, the founder of Live Aid, launched a new "climate justice" campaign on Friday ahead of December's UN Climate Change Conference in Copenhagen.

The campaign, dubbed "tck tck tck: Time for Climate Justice", will see advertising agencies and major organisations such as HSBC and Oxfam use mass marketing to call on world leaders to agree a "just and binding deal" on climate change.

The "tck tck tck" campaign aims to emulate the success of Band Aid and Lance Armstrong's Livestrong to create the world's largest petition in support of climate justice.

A campaign song, which sees various musicians including Duran Duran cover Australian band Midnight Oil's "Beds are burning", will be released in September as a free internet download. People will be able to upload a video of their own "tck", creating a virtual human clock, counting down to Copenhagen.

Desmond Tutu and actors Jet Li and Milla Jovovich are among the celebrities lending their support to the project, alongside Google's YouTube.

Speaking at the Cannes Lions advertising festival, Mr Annan said time was running out in the fight against climate change.

"The clock is ticking around the world, we have no time to waste," he said.

He added that marketing campaigns on climate change too often focused on polar bears on melting ice caps and neglected the human impact.

"We tend to worry a lot about the loss of biodiversity. We forget that we are part of that biodiversity and we need some protection."

The Nobel peace prize winner also warned that developing countries suffered disproportionately from the effects of climate change, which is largely caused by emissions in the West.

"Copenhagen presents a truly historic opportunity to agree the steps this crisis demands. It must be global, it must be fair and it must be binding ... We have to accept the 'polluter pays' principle, that pollution has a price and the polluter must pay," he said. "Those who are bicycling should not subsidise those who insist on driving their SUVs."

Mr Geldof emphasised the cost of tackling climate change, which he put at $1,000bn, or 1.6 per cent of global annual gross domestic product.

"We need to cut our emissions in the developed world by 80 per cent by 2050," he said.

Mr Geldof called on delegates at the Cannes advertising festival - where attendance is down around 40 per cent on last year - to focus their creative talents on driving public awareness of "proper politics".

"You are creatively some of the most intelligent people on the planet gathered in one space. You are the most powerful potential political tool," he said

The tck tck tck campaign was developed by EuroRSCG Worldwide, a division of French advertising group Havas. A video advert, soundtracked by Coldplay, has been released online and more will appear in TV and print soon.

David Jones, global chief executive of Havas Worldwide, encouraged other brands and advertisers to pick up and reuse the "tck tck tck" logo, for free, to demonstrate their commitment to corporate social responsibility.

"If 1 per cent of the world's advertisers put this on their advertising it would be the biggest campaign in the world," he said.  He also encouraged the media to donate free advertising space to the campaign. "There's a bit of it around at the moment. We'd love some of that, thank you."

Mr Jones said that advertising agencies could help to raise the profile of the Copenhagen summit, and therefore increase pressure on politicians. "Our belief, my belief is that what our industry is great at is changing people's behaviour," he said.
