 Wednesday, July 22, 2009 613 mots

Atkins likens climate change to industrial revolution
By David Fickling

Climate change presents a challenge as great as the industrial revolution and many construction companies are unprepared to deal with it, according to the head of Europe's biggest engineering consultant.

Accounting for carbon as mandated emissions caps bite into profit margins will make and break companies, says Keith Clarke, chief executive of Atkins and chairman of the Construction Industry Council, a professional body.

"This decarbonising of our economy is going to be a massive threat to some parts of our industry. This is like the moment when chip manufacturers started to replace valves: some companies will thrive and some will not cope."

Such talk is unusual in the construction industry, an energy-intensive sector where innovation is often slow and commitment on climate change usually stops at lip service.

Nigel Meir, a fund manager at Ludgate Environmental Fund, says that although green interest in the construction industry has been picking up rapidly, it is still "not well advanced" compared with other sectors.

But meeting the government's target of cutting carbon emissions by 34 per cent from 1990 levels by 2020 must involve changes on the building site. At least 40 per cent of the UK's carbon emissions come from heating and running buildings. A further 5 per cent comes from the activities of the construction sector itself, according to the Green Building Council.

Mr Clarke speaks with the zeal of a convert. Climate change mitigation is a "moral imperative" which will involve "revolutionary change in our society", as well as a "staggering opportunity" for the economy.

The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.

"It won't be comfortable," he says, with just a hint of glee. "It's horrifying, it really is. But it is extremely exciting to think about a change that has so many unpredictable effects. Intellectually it's about as exciting as it gets."

Regulation has made the business of decarbonising the construction sector a reality. The government, which announced its carbon strategy last week, set targets for all new homes to be zero-emission by 2016, with domestic energy efficiency to be improved by 25 per cent as soon as next year.

The government wants those codes to spread to the rest of the industry so that all new buildings would be zero-emission by 2020. On top of that, the cap on the European Union's emissions trading system will start tightening from 2013, ratcheting up the price of carbon and forcing companies to account for their emissions.

That gives hard financial reasons to be ready. "There's dynamic change coming to the marketplace and you should be ready for it," says Mr Clarke. "That's what CEOs get paid to do: guess the future and try and dance their way through it."

But the scale of the change means this is easier said than done. "Every aspect of our society will have some carbon rationing," he says. "A lot of companies have environmental groups but I don't think many are thinking about this as a fundamental change to all their products.

"All of our clients are going to start to have some kind of carbon budgeting in the next five years, but carbon accountancy is behind double entry book-keeping at the moment," he says. "We've just invented it and we have to get up to international accounting standards pretty quickly."

With a view to hastening the process, Atkins has funded a chair in sustainability at the British University in Dubai, trained its 18,000 staff in emissions mitigation and invested in modelling programmes to embed carbon accounting in design tools. He says this progress means the Bahrain World Trade Center, which Atkins designed and engineered, is looking out of date a year after it opened.

The company also aims to reduce its electricity usage by 12.5 per cent in the next 12-18 months. At present, Atkins' declared emissions from office energy and business travel do not look particularly efficient compared with its peers. While the company consumed 25.8 tonnes of carbon for every £1m of turnover last year, Amec used 19.79 tonnes and WSP's UK operations (the only ones for which complete figures are available) 14.4 tonnes.

Mr Clarke's road to Damascus moment came only recently: he cites the Stern review, Al Gore's An Inconvenient Truth and the influence of his daughter Jo, 25, who works for Otesha, a sustainable lifestyle charity. "She made me think about it far more than the general nice middle-class awareness about being green."

"If we materially miss these targets we're into scenarios that are so bad you just don't want to think about them. Your children certainly won't need a pension. They'll need a shotgun."
