 Monday, July 5, 2010 575 mots

Dutch study broadly backs IPCC climate report
By Fiona Harvey in London and Clive Cookson in Turin

A Dutch government investigation into climate change science has found that there is no reason to doubt the central claims that global warming is occurring and is found to be the result of human actions.

However, the study suggested that the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change might have emphasised the negative effects of climate change over some of the benefits.

It raised 10 question marks over the one-third of the 3,000-page 2007 landmark IPCC report on the impacts of climate change that it studied, but several of these were either simple typographical errors, errors in the footnoting, or minor problems in interpreting ranges of uncertainty. For instance, the IPCC in 2007 estimated that 75m to 250m people would be subject to increased water stress owing to climate change in Africa by 2020, but the Dutch study suggested this range should have been 90m to 220m.

The study was commissioned because of the "climategate" scandals that occurred late last year and early this year, in which the IPCC's report was alleged to contain several errors, and climate scientists from the UK's University of East Anglia were separately alleged to have distorted climate science.

The chief error in the IPCC report was a claim that the glaciers of the Himalayas could largely disappear by 2035. This was determined to be unfounded and subsequently retracted. Other claims in the report that have been questioned, such as potential drops in crop yields in Africa if climate change progresses, are defended by the IPCC.

As to the overall findings of the 2007 IPCC report, the most comprehensive study of climate science to date and the benchmark used by most of the world's governments, the Netherlands Environmental Assessment Agency said: "The summary conclusions were well-founded and none were found to contain any significant errors."

Martin Parry, a leading IPCC author and professor at Imperial College London, said the report - the latest of several studies into the "climategate" affair -- had vindicated climate scientists: "There have been a very small number of near-trivial errors in an extremely dense report."

The Dutch study was prompted by a row in the country's parliament over whether the IPCC - the body of the world's leading climate scientists - had been correct in its estimation of the amount of Dutch land that was below sea level. Although the figure quoted in the IPCC study was subsequently found to be incorrect, it was the estimate provided to the IPCC by the Dutch government.

However, the Dutch finding that the IPCC might have over-emphasised the negative aspects of climate change was strongly rebuffed by IPCC scientists in London on Monday. Prof Parry said the 2007 report had contained estimates of the possible benefits to certain regions from climate change, but that these were clearly outweighed by the very large damages that global warming would cause, particularly when coupled with population growth and increased pressure on water supplies in many poorer regions of the world.

On Wednesday, a separate inquiry into the UEA e-mails will be published. The 500-page report is expected to say that the main conclusions of climate science are unaffected, but to recommend greater transparency among climate scientists.

Separately, two international studies of the earth's "carbon balance", released at the EuroScience forum in Turin, will fill in some of the data gaps for which previous IPCC assessments were criticised.

The studies, co-ordinated by Germany's Max Planck Society, use measurements from Fluxnet, a global network of more than 500 "flux towers". These assess the flow of carbon dioxide to and from different types of vegetation around the world, from tropical forest to temperate grassland.

Markus Reichstein, of the Max Planck Institute for Biogeochemistry, said the measurements would help to answer criticism of the IPCC for relying too much on computer modelling.

"The IPCC assessments are largely based on computer simulations," he said. "We believe we can falsify or confirm the simulations."

The studies, which are published online in the journal Science, show that the world's plantlife "breathes in" 123bn tonnes of carbon a year. This amount is very sensitive to changes in rainfall but less sensitive to temperature changes than many climatologists had previously estimated.
