 WORLD NEWS, Friday, February 15, 2008 471 mots, p. Page 3

UK space plan to help combat climate change
By SALAMANDER DAVOUDI

Tackling the threat of climate change on earth will be at the heart of Britain's civilian space strategy under plans laid out yesterday by the government.

British scientists are to develop satellites and advanced observation technologies capable of looking back at earth from orbit to monitor deforestation, the melting of ice caps and -violent weather, according to a strategy drawn up by the British National Space Centre, the agency that co-ordinates the country's non-military space activities.

"Global satellite-based monitoring systems underpin our understanding of the health of the planet, alert us to dangers and speed up our responses," said the report.

These satellites will help to develop early warning systems for natural disasters such as hurricanes and -tsunamis, as well as monitoring carbon reduction agreements.

Under the plans, which run until 2012, an international space facility will be built west of London to focus on climate change and robotic space exploration.

Hopes for a British astronaut were lifted as officials are to review a decision taken 20 years ago by Margaret Thatcher not to take part in human space missions, which are hugely costly. The review is expected to take between six and 12 months.

Britain is the only G8 member not to have a manned space programme. It spends Pounds 207m (Dollars 408m, Euros 280m) a year on civil space activities, a third of the amount spent by France, which has a manned programme. Almost two-thirds of the UK's money is channelled to the European Space Agency.

China launched a manned mission in 2003 whereas India and Japan have yet to do so. Despite being one of Asia's richest and most technologically advanced countries, Japan's rocket and satellite programmes have been plagued by failures.

Ian Pearson, UK minister for science and innovation, said the international community was on "the cusp of a wave of new space exploration" and that it was important to make sure Britain "did not get left behind".

The BNSC is to examine the economic, scientific and technological benefits - and costs - of manned missions.

In 2006, the European Space Agency's budget was Euros 2.9bn but many European countries have their own space budgets, which are independently funded. In the US, Nasa's budget last year was Dollars 17.5bn. Russia's space agency is believed to have had a budget of Dollars 800m-Dollars 900m in 2006. Space exploration contributes Pounds 7bn to the British economy. By 2020 the global market for space technology is set to rise from Pounds 62.5bn to Pounds 543bn.

"Space technology is a vital part of our everyday life and satellite communications and space technology provide strong business opportunities for the future," Mr Pearson said. "Applications from space underpin major business -sectors."

A national programme to develop specialised space technology will be set up offering grants to attract engineering companies. The government hopes to double the number of British companies involved in the space business by 2012. Britain will look at conducting missions outside the European Space Agency by collaborating with Russia and emerging space-faring nations such as China, Brazil and India.

Moon mission

British scientists have proposed sending an unmanned mission to the moon by 2011.

The MoonLITE project is expected to win initial support today from Nasa and the UK government space authority, the British National Space Centre.

The mission would fire four darts into the moon's surface from an orbiting satellite. Data from the darts would be sent to earth via the satellite.

Editorial Comment, Page 8
