 NATIONAL NEWS, Friday, May 2, 2008 377 mots, p. 4

Climate change imperils City
By Daniel Thomas, Property Correspondent

London and the Thames Gateway are at particular risk of flooding caused by climate change, a report says today, pointing to the scale of housing development planned in the region and danger to the capital's financial district.

The comprehensive study, commissioned by Hermes, the fund manager, to advise on future risks to its £10bn property portfolio, warns that the highest danger is flooding in city centres. There are also dangers from excess heat, drought and wind speed, with both commercial and residential property at risk.

The analysis, by researchers at University College London, assesses the vulnerability of 14 strategic UK cities and towns. There is a clear north-south divide, with cities such as Southampton and Bristol bearing the highest risk to all aspects of climate change, compared with comparatively safe areas in the north such as Glasgow, Belfast and Edinburgh.

Southampton is identified as the UK's most vulnerable location, while London and the Thames Gateway areas are seen as particularly at risk of flooding. Though the government has identified the climate risks to development on flood plains in England, the UCL report highlights the unforeseen problems facing city centres, where it says there is a lack of "coping strategies".

"There are a number of major office developments in harbourside and riverside locations - such as Cardiff - which may find themselves at risk over the longer term," it says. "This is a particular concern in London, where the cost implications of major flooding due to the overtopping of the Thames Barrier would be considerable."

The report breaks down the main risks as: increased temperatures and heat waves affecting the internal comfort levels of buildings and storage; extreme rainfall and flooding, leading to property damage; drought affecting water supplies; reduced soil moisture leading to damaging ground movement; and increased wind speed, with subsequent risk of structural damage.

The report found that extreme rainfall and associated local flooding would be the greatest climatic threat to commercial property. Flooding is expected to affect all sectors of UK property.

"Flooding is the key right now," said Yvonne Rydin, professor of planning, environment and public policy at UCL's Bartlett School of Planning. "There needs to be more work done on urban drainage and the permeability of urban areas."

Prof Rydin pointed to greater risks among older and lower-quality properties. "Secondary and tertiary properties are not well equipped to deal with these changes," she said.

Hermes has also conducted a survey to identify buildings in its portfolio most at risk of flooding.

Keith Bugden, development director at Hermes, said the company was still deciding what to do with the properties revealed as most in danger. "We wanted to see how resilient our buildings were and where the potential risks were," added Rupert Clarke, chief executive of Hermes.
Aussi paru dans
