Europe Ed1
EU SUMMIT, Friday, December 12, 2008 315 mots, p. 2

Obama team vows climate partnership with Europe
By Fiona Harvey in Poznan

Europe will find the US a willing partner in its efforts on climate change, Barack Obama's representative at talks in Poznan said yesterday.

Senator John Kerry, who has been asked by the US president-elect to report back to him on the United Nations climate change talks in Poland, said the new administration's approach to Europe would be "as different as night from day" on climate policy compared with that of George W. Bush.

"Europe has been waiting with baited breath for someone to partner with," he said.

José Manuel Barroso, president of the European Commission, told the Financial Times this week a partnership with the US on global warming and the economy was a vital part of his plans.

Mr Kerry laid out some of the areas in which the US could work closely with the European Union: linking a US carbon trading system to that of the EU; joint ventures on technology; and combined efforts to develop commercial carbon capture and storage projects.

While declining to give specifics, he hinted at the level of emissions cuts the US would have to consider. The science showed a need for cuts of 25 to 40 per cent in developed country emissions by 2020, he said.

The EU has agreed to cut its emissions by 30 per cent by 2020 if other large economies adopt the same target.

A programme of billions of dollars worth of measures to encourage the development of environmentally friendly technology and create "green" jobs would be a key part of the economic stimulus to be unveiled by Mr Obama shortly after his inauguration on January 20, Mr Kerry said.

But it was unlikely that a cap-and-trade programme, which has been promised by the president-elect, would be part of the January package. Mr Kerry said it would be too complex to try to pass a cap-and-trade emissions trading scheme so soon.

However, he said the US would sign up to a new global agreement on climate change mandating substantial emissions cuts at a UN conference in Copenhagen next December, the deadline the UN has set for forging a deal to replace the Kyoto treaty, the main provisions of which expire in 2012.

Some observers doubt the US could make such a deadline, given the time taken to hand over to the new administration. Mr Kerry dismissed such fears as "inappropriate".

While in Poznan yesterday, Mr Kerry talked to Ban Ki-moon, UN secretary-general, of Mr Obama's plans. Mr Ban said he was considering hosting a meeting of world leaders next September to help forge an agreement.
