 FT REPORT - GLOBAL TRAVELLER 2008, Thursday, March 27, 2008 635 mots, p. 2

Making the most out of climate change
By Tom Delay

Business is becoming increasingly sensitised to climate change and therefore seeking opportunities to reduce carbon emissions. However, for many organisations ,travel is the lifeblood that enables them to deliver quality of service and forge commercial relationships crucial to their success.

Although travel will clearly have a big impact on a businesses' environmental credentials, it is important to remember that emissions relating to aviation are only one element of an organisation's carbon footprint. Aviation in the UK accounts for about 38m tonnes of carbon dioxide compared with the country's overall carbon footprint of 555m tonnes.

Businesses should take steps to avoid excessive or unnecessary flights and sustainability must be factored into their travel policies. However, for a company serious about its credentials, efforts to address the carbon impact of international travel should form part of its broader attempts to reduce carbon emissions - both in its own operations and across its supply chain.

In recent months the need to tackle climate change has become increasingly apparent. Legislative pressure in the form of the Energy White Paper and the Climate Change Bill, which made the UK's commitment to a 60 per cent reduction in its carbon emissions by 2050 legally binding for the first time, will no doubt weigh heavily on companies across the country. Following the recent budget announcement, the Climate Change Bill targets may increase even further to 80 per cent, so there is little sign this pressure will ease. Recent severe weather has also served as an immediate and tangible reminder of the consequences of climate change, disrupting the day-to-day running of some UK organisations and - as with last summer's floods - prompting concerns about business continuity. Carbon Trust research shows larger organisations in the UK are most likely to have seen the impact of climate change, with 43 per cent of business leaders saying they have already been affected.

So there is no denying the threat climate change poses but what of the associated opportunities? Cutting carbon use makes good business sense, especially in light of increasing consumer pressure. In research undertaken by Ipsos Mori in 2007, more than 75 per cent of consumers agreed that if they had more information about a company's social, environmental and ethical behaviour, this would influence their purchasing decisions. As climate change becomes an important issue for corporate reputations, it makes sense for companies to differentiate themselves from their competitors by proving to customers that they are serious about it.

Essentially, saving carbon saves money. Quick-win, low- and no-cost measures can have a substantial impact on most businesses and, once short-term savings are realised, the money can be re-invested in cost- effective measures that require higher levels of capital investment, such as installing energy efficient equipment. In the longer term, these savings can filter down to benefit stakeholders, employees and customers.

Only 1 per cent of UK businesses actually know their carbon footprint and 93 per cent of small and medium-sized businesses say their company does not measure carbon emissions because of a lack of expertise. Measurement of an organisation's carbon footprint is often seen as the first step in the process of cutting emissions so these make for worrying findings. By calculating the impact businesses have in terms of carbon emissions, companies can set manageable targets and create policies and action plans for change. Given that there is a great deal of advice and support available - the Carbon Trust has a free carbon calculator - there is clearly still a long way to go if UK businesses are to become the international leaders in the fight against climate change. However, given the economic benefits, the legislative pressures and consumer's increasing propensity for green products and services, inaction is no longer an option.

The debate around business travel is no doubt one that will continue, particularly in the light of the proposed Heathrow expansion. Despite the media attention that developments of this nature invariably generate, it is important organisations remain focused on the bigger picture, and make efforts to reduce all elements of their carbon footprint, rather than simply fixating on an important, but nonetheless isolated, component.

However, change is definitely in the air. Last year will be remembered as the year that business sat up and really took notice of climate change. The Carbon Trust received an unprecedented level of interest from businesses asking for advice. We need many more businesses to explore innovative ways in which they can respond to the impact of climate change. Whether it is re-thinking products, saving money through lower energy bills or opening up new markets, 2008 should be remembered as the year in which carbon reduction took centre stage. 