 FT REPORT - SUSTAINABLE BUSINESS 2008 - FRONT PAGE, Thursday, October 9, 2008 1106 mots, p. 1

Staying on course in a tougher climate
By Fiona Harvey, Environment Correspondent

Concerns over climate change have not been at the forefront of most chief executives' minds in recent weeks: the financial crisis and economic downturn have eclipsed all other issues. While managers are worried about whether their businesses are sustainable economically, the question of whether they are sustainable environmentally seems less pressing.

Before the crisis wiped out other concerns, companies were increasingly eager to trumpet their environmental credentials. Large companies, including household names such as Wal-Mart and General Electric, Ford and Coca-Cola, HSBC and News Corporation, made pledges to cut their greenhouse gas emissions and lessen their environmental impact.

What will happen to companies' environmental commitments when businesses are fighting for their survival? Will the pledges made in a sunnier economic climate be forgotten?

Talk to any of the companies that have taken a lead on environmental issues, and the answer is the same: no. Environmental sustainability is just as important in a downturn, they insist.

"Our goal is still to be one of the world's leading brands in corporate sustainability and we regard it as central to business strategy," says Francis Sullivan, deputy head of corporate sustainability at HSBC.

"We continue our commitment to reducing our environmental footprint and implementing our sustainability risk policies. We also maintain that sustainability offers diverse business opportunities [such as investment in renewable energy]."

Bank of America announced last March it was embarking on a $20bn 10-year strategy to tackle climate change, and help its customers do the same. The company insists that the crisis engulfing the sector will not deflect it from this purpose.

"[We] continue to move forward with our environmental initiative to address climate change," the company says. "Now, more than ever, there is a critical need for financing to develop environmentally sustainable products and technologies, accelerate the deployment of existing technologies, and increase energy efficiency."

Retailers and consumer goods companies are equally adamant that they will stay the course.

"Sustainability will remain critical to our business, even during an economic downturn," says Ian Cheshire, group chief executive at Kingfisher. "As a major international retailer, we have a responsibility to tackle issues such as climate change and work towards a more sustainable future."

Mr Cheshire says the company's customers are "increasingly aware of environmental issues" and seeking to buy products accordingly.

Indeed, companies would be foolish to abandon their green credentials at the first sign of difficulty, says Solitaire Townsend, chief executive of Futerra Sustainability Communications, which advises companies on their green strategies.

"How would it look," she asks. "If companies drop [their interest in green issues], everyone will understand that they didn't mean it after all. What will that do to their relationship with their customers - or with their staff?"

Consumers are still interested in environmental matters, despite their economic worries, argues Jenny Dawkins, research director at Ipsos Mori, the polling company. She points to polls from the UK to prove the point: the environment was mentioned as a top concern by 8 per cent of people surveyed in September.

This is far below the number concerned about the economy - 55 per cent, the highest recorded since this series of polls began in 1974 - and below the peak of 19 per cent of people who rated it a top concern in early 2007, shortly after the release of Al Gore's film An Inconvenient Truth . But it is much higher than the 2 to 4 per cent of people who rated the environment a top concern in the period 2002 to 2004. The environment remains relatively high among people's priorities.

"The environment has been overshadowed [by the economy] but it has not dropped off the radar," says Ms Dawkins.

People in the US are also still interested in climate change, says Michael Allegretti, head of government relations in the US for the Climate Group, a non-profit organisation that works with businesses on cutting emissions. Although the economy may be a more pressing concern, public opinion is in favour of taking action to tackle global warming, he says.

Businesses should take note, advises Ms Dawkins. "Seven out of 10 people think that in tough economic times it is more important for a company to behave responsibly," she says. "The onus is very much on companies to continue to behave responsibly in line with consumer expectations. That pressure is not going away."

What is more, companies have much to gain from taking steps to improve their environmental performance, says Ms Townsend. "This is not some fluffy issue. It is a business issue. Companies should understand that."

The guiding principles behind behaving in an environmentally sound manner are the same as the principles of thrift and economy, she points out.

Using fewer resources is at the core of environmental sustainability, and leads to cost savings. "Thrift and being green go hand in hand," she says.

Jan Babiak, global climate change and sustainability services leader at Ernst & Young, says that companies should realise that there are substantial savings to be made: from cutting down on the wasteful use of energy to economising with other materials.

She says: "Insightful managements realise that having an environmental policy in place will save them a lot of money. There are some very simple but impactful changes that can be made. Double-sided printing and switching lights to movement sensitive activation are just two small examples."

The current high energy prices only make the issue more important in a downturn, adds Andrew Caveney, partner for business advisory services at Ernst & Young. He explains: "Rocketing energy and commodity prices represent a far more powerful driver of green business practices than the existing level of legislation or consumer pressure."

Managers can learn much about how to improve their business processes from looking at their carbon dioxide emissions, he says. "Carbon in the supply chain is not only a liability in itself but an indicator of an inefficient operating model and exposure to rising energy prices."

Businesses that ignore climate change may also expose themselves to large risks. For instance, they may be challenged by lawsuits from plaintiffs arguing that companies have caused damage to property by failing to take action to cut their emissions.

Companies also face the risk of the damaging effects of climate change, such as rising sea levels, droughts, floods and fiercer storms. Tightening environmental regulations - such as the introduction of a cap-and-trade system for cutting carbon emissions in the US, which has been promised by both presidential candidates - present a further risk for unwary companies.

Mr Sullivan of HSBC says: "Managing risk and promoting business opportunity is critical and, in the context of sustainability issues, is as important today as it was before the current challenges in the financial markets surfaced."

As well as posing a threat, climate change opens opportunities for companies beyond efficiency savings. If the global economy is to move to lower-carbon means of production, then many industries will have to change.

The energy industry is the most obvious, as renewable forms of energy will have to take precedence over fossil fuels. New carbon abatement technologies such as carbon capture and storage are also being developed, opening up a new market.

Other sectors will also have to change, opening opportunities for new products and business techniques. Construction companies, for instance, will have to find ways to make greener buildings, using more environmentally sound materials and designs. Car companies are looking to use new technologies such as electric engines and hydrogen fuel cells. Airlines are testing new designs and fuels made from plants.

The downturn will have some effect on the number of companies bringing out "green" initiatives, predicts Ms Townsend at Futerra.

"Companies that just wanted to dip their toe in the water, or that wanted to gush about climate change rather than really doing anything real about their environmental impact - they will go away," she says.

"There will be a lot fewer 'have-a-go greenies' around, those companies that just talk about green issues because they think it's fashionable."

But companies with a longer-term vision, and companies that perceive the benefits of environmental management, will continue to seek to improve their green performance, she says. "Consumers will trust those companies more."
