 NATIONAL NEWS, Tuesday, February 19, 2008 345 mots, p. Page 4

Top executives slow to adopt climate change strategy
By JOHN WILLMAN

Very few senior executives have a strategy in place for dealing with climate change, despite the overwhelming view that it is a serious issue for business, a survey has found.

Most top executives in the survey were not aware that the government had committed itself to a 60 per cent reduction in greenhouse gas emissions by 2050.

The findings also showed half the corporate leaders thought the government was doing too little to educate business on how to tackle climate change.

Carried out by YouGov Stone for KPMG, the study also found the number of executives who think climate change a significant issue rose sharply last year, from 52 per cent in May to 85 per cent six months later.

Three-quarters of the 200 corporate leaders - from the FTSE-350 and similar-sized private companies - thought climate change would grow in importance as an issue over the next few years.

Seventy per cent said reducing greenhouse gas emissions was the most important method of reducing global warming, while 76 per cent said businesses and individuals needed to change the way they worked and lived and take steps to tackle climate change

However, the number with a clear strategy for tackling climate change increased much less over the period, from 14 to 17 per cent.

While 40 per cent in the latest survey said they felt they had a good understanding of the issue and were working on a strategy, 36 per cent had only a vague or no understanding and 6 per cent did not believe climate change was happening.

A third of the companies had not put climate change on their board's agenda, while a fifth said it was unlikely to be discussed by the board in the near future.

The most popular measure for tackling climate change was recycling and using recycled products - adopted by more than three-quarters of the companies. Two-thirds were using energy-efficient appliances, and half were educating and training staff on environmentally friendly business practices.

Just 22 per cent were aiming for carbon neutral status, while 31 per cent were reviewing their business model in the light of climate change. "Our survey shows the majority of business leaders still don't treat climate change as an economic issue that can have an impact on the bottom line," said Richard Sharman, head of KPMG's carbon advisory group.

"Knowing your carbon number is becoming a key performance indicator that employees, regulators and shareholders demand accuracy and assurances on."
