 WORLD NEWS, Tuesday, June 3, 2008 448 mots, p. 5

Tokyo mayor leads on climate
By Jonathan Soble in Tokyo

Faced with a government dragging its feet over climate change, the celebrity governor of a country's most populous territory decides to go it alone by imposing strict curbs on local greenhouse gas emissions. In doing so, he risks clashing with a national administration run by his own conservative political party.

This is not California but Tokyo, which will impose Japan's first mandatory carbon cap-and-trade scheme from 2010 as part of a plan to cut local emissions by a quarter by 2020.

The initiative threatens to overshadow more modest emissions proposals being prepared by Yasuo Fukuda, prime minister, ahead of a meeting of G8 leaders to be hosted by Japan in July. The measures, which are still being debated, are expected to focus on longer-term reduction targets and industry-by-industry measures for improving energy efficiency.

Tokyo's climate programme has been championed by Shintaro Ishihara, its 75-year-old three-term governor, a rightwinger best known outside Japan for his 1980s polemic The Japan that Can Say No and for periodic verbal slights against women, foreign immigrants and China.

The governor - who hails from the same long-ruling Liberal Democratic party as Mr Fukuda and was once considered a dark horse candidate for prime minister - traces his green conversion to a stint as head of the national environment agency in the late 1970s.

At the time, Japan was dealing with the gruesome effects of Minamata mercury poisoning, a product of industrial pollution. "I saw the kind of tragedy that the government can cause when it fails to act," Mr Ishihara said in an interview.

The clash of policies has drawn comparisons with the battle in the US between California, under the governorship of Arnold Schwarzenegger, and the Bush administration over the right to set tougher vehicle emissions standards.

Yurika Ayukawa, a climate activist and academic, believes Tokyo's effort could be "crucial" to shaping national policy ahead of the G8 summit, where Mr Fukuda has promised to put global warming high on the agenda. "There is pressure for Japan to show more leadership," she said.

Tokyo will impose mandatory emissions caps on its largest polluters from 2010, along with European-style credit trading for those who overshoot their limits. The city has budgeted Y20bn ($191m, €123m, £97m) for green initiatives this year, including subsidies to help small businesses comply with tighter environmental standards.

It is also tightening building regulations and sharpening scrutiny of the energyefficiency plans the city has required businesses to draw up since 2002. Some 1,000 hectares of new greenery will be planted in the decade to 2016 - a project it hopes will help it win the right to host the Olympics that year.

The measures, however, will do little on their own to reduce Japan's contribution to global warming, something Mr Ishihara acknowledges. Tokyo has little heavy industry and, in spite of its population of 13m, is responsible for only about 5 per cent of Japan's emissions.

Although Mr Ishihara rattles off environmental statistics with the vigour of Al Gore, the former US vice-president, he says he is a "pessimist" about political leaders' ability to turn things around.

Even if Japan as a whole follows Tokyo's lead - an unlikely scenario, he says, given the "pride" of its top-down bureaucracy - there is still the problem of China, his long-time bugbear. "As Minamata disease showed, when you try to catch up to developed countries, you end up ignoring environmental issues."
