 Thursday, August 13, 2009 431 mots

Climate change report urges cut in costs
By Kate Mackenzie in London

Avoiding a global temperature increase of more than 2 degrees Celsius, which scientists regard as the safe limit, will be prohibitively expensive, while a far less ambitious target would produce a more cost-efficient result for the world economy, according to a new study.

The report, published Friday by the Copenhagen Consensus , a group of economists brought together by a Danish academic, Bjorn Lomborg, is at odds with the prevailing view that large sums should be spent over the next decade to ward off climate change.

Mr Lomborg, long known as a climate change sceptic, told the Financial Times last week he now believed questions over the science "have been answered pretty unequivocally" and that an agreement at the next UN climate change meeting in Copenhagen in December would be crucial.

However, he believes the measures being considered are unnecessarily costly.

The report, by Richard Tol, an environmental economist, says a less ambitious plan would fare better on a cost-benefit basis than a big, early investment. "Coming up with over-ambitious targets is not credible," says Mr Tol. "It signals that it's just a gimmick to win voters, that it's not for real."

The cost of stabilising atmospheric carbon dioxide at 450 parts per million - the level thought necessary to avoid the worst effects of climate change - would be 12.9 per cent of global gross domestic product, Mr Tol says. That would require a tax of $68 per tonne of CO2 worldwide, from 2010.

However, that scenario would cost $50 over the course of the century for every dollar saved, Mr Tol argues. By contrast, a much lower worldwide CO2 tax of 50 cents per tonne would cost only 66 cents for every dollar saved, but under this scenario concentration would stabilise at 850ppm - a level scientists say would have catastrophic effects on climate.

Dimitri Zenghelis, who contributed to the UK's influential 2006 Stern Review on the costs of climate change, agreed that keeping CO2 concentrations at 450ppm without overshooting could be expensive. But he said a target any higher than 500ppm would be dangerous.

"Tol downweighs future impacts and overstates the lack of affordable options to bring emissions down," said Mr Zenghelis. "Using his assumptions he would also recommend not committing any noticeable investment to counter a known meteor heading for earth, or a devastating global pandemic due in 50 or 100 years, because it is not our current concern."

Mr Tol's report excluded the uncertainty of the effects of climate change, which economists such as Mr Zenghelis argue is one of the most important reasons to invest heavily immediately.

Early emissions cuts would be cheaper or even have a negative cost, Mr Zenghelis said, and would be easier than removing carbon-intensive infrastructure later, or removing carbon from the air.

However Mr Tol's scenarios assume that spending is perfectly optimised, which he says is far from reality and therefore strengthens the argument for more cautious investment.

The paper is published on Friday with accompanying reports saying that curbing greenhouse emissions such as methane and soot would be much more cost-effective than focusing exclusively on carbon dioxide.

"We're not saying this is the best solution - we're just coming out with a lot of different options," he said of Mr Tol's scenarios.
