 OBAMA IN ASIA, Monday, November 16, 2009 466 mots, p. 3

No binding agreement but still hope for progress

Q&A Climate change

Barack Obama, the US president, said yesterday that next month's summit in Copenhagen, Denmark, would not produce a legally binding agreement to tackle global warming. So what have his comments done to any hope of a deal on climate change?

What has happened?

Mr Obama says that instead of a binding treaty, he and other world leaders are aiming for a "political agreement" on the substantive issues.

What do other countries think?

The United Nations, the European Union and other nations had already conceded that there was not enough time to draw up a full legal treaty at Copenhagen, so they too are aiming for a political agreement, to be followed by a full treaty next year.

What is a political agreement and how is it different from a treaty?

A political agreement would not be legally binding under international law. But it would be a document that leaders or their representatives would have to sign, and it would be difficult and politically embarrassing for them to break it subsequently.

So this is a big problem for Copenhagen?

No. Even if Copenhagen were to produce a legally binding treaty, that document would have no real legal force until it was ratified by the nations.

Why are people complaining?

Having to wait until next year for a treaty to be drawn up will mean a delay to the process of implementing any agreement, which must be done by the end of 2012 for a new global framework on emissions to be in force when the current provisions of the Kyoto protocol expire. Any delay increases the possibility of disagreement.

What would a Copenhagen "political agreement" contain?

For countries to sign it, a political agreement would have to set out four main commitments. These are: targets for developed countries to make big cuts in their emissions by 2020; agreement on the measures that developing countries would take to curb the future growth of their emissions; financing from rich to poor countries to help them curb their emissions and cope with climate change; and an outline of the governance structures to monitor and deliver the above. Are countries agreed on these?

Not yet, but nearly. Almost all the big developed countries have now set out their emissions-cutting targets for 2020, and the main developing economies have outlined the measures they will take to curb their emissions growth. Agreement on governance issues should not be too difficult to achieve.

So what is not agreed?

The US has not agreed 2020 emissions-cutting targets and until that happens many developing countries will not agree to "internationalise" their domestic commitments on emissions - that is, to codify them ready to be legally binding at an international level. Finance is also tricky: the EU is the only developed group of countries to have set out commitments on financing, and even those are vague. What's holding up the US?

Mr Obama has not yet managed to pass domestic cap-and-trade legislation, which would set out the US's emissions-cutting targets and some financial help for poor countries. The bill is now before the Senate, but there is almost no chance it will pass before the Copenhagen summit, and its prospects of passing next year are still in doubt. Without the backing of Congress, Mr Obama will find it difficult to make commitments.

And if he cannot make these commitments?

There might be no agreement at Copenhagen, or only a partial agreement, excluding the US.

Would that be disastrous?

It would leave the world without a global framework for tackling climate change.
