 COUNTDOWN TO COPENHAGEN, Saturday, December 5, 2009 275 mots, p. 8

Global warming a 'hoax'

US sceptic Jim Inhofe
By Anna Fifield in Washington

Interview

Jim Inhofe has one mission for the Copenhagen climate change summit: to be a self-declared "one-man truth squad", writes Anna Fifield in Washington.

"I want to make sure that people from around the world understand that there is no way that the United States is going to ratify any kind of treaty that is anything at all like Kyoto," the cowboy-boot-wearing senator from Oklahoma told the Financial Times.

"And there is no way in the world that the Kerry-Boxer Bill on the floor of the Senate will even come up for a vote. It's dead, gone," said Mr Inhofe, referring to the climate change bill now languishing in the upper chamber.

President Barack Obama has conceded that the Copenhagen summit is not going to result in a binding international treaty. But next week he will state that the US is working towards cutting its carbon emissions by 17 per cent from 2005 levels by 2020.

To counteract that message, Mr Inhofe, ranking Republican on the Senate's environment and public works committee, plans to attend too. "I think it's important that people who come to an event like that, from countries all around the world, get accurate information as to the standing of different countries," he said.

Mr Inhofe, who prides himself on being an arch-sceptic "long before it was fashionable", according to his aides, is one of the loudest anti-climate change voices on Capitol Hill. He denounces "environmental thuggery", Al Gore and his "science fiction movie" An Inconvenient Truth , and labels the whole idea of global warming a "hoax".

Mr Inhofe arrived at his position on climate change after the Kyoto protocol, which the US never ratified, was drafted in 1997.

"I thought that man-made gases must cause global warming because everybody says they do," he says. Then he saw reports that it would cost the US as much as $330bn (£201bn) a year to live by it. "So I thought, it's my responsibility to make sure that the science is there. One by one, the scientists started coming in with the truth," he says. 