 WORLD NEWS, Tuesday, April 29, 2008 490 mots, p. 6

Global warming fans the flames of seal cull debate
By Daina Lawrence

The fierce debate surrounding Canada's annual seal "harvest" intensified last month when the European Union proposed a ban on importing seal products from the country, a move that would severely damage the cull.

But the seal hunters face another obstacle looming ever larger on the horizon: global warming.

The impact of climate change in the northern regions of the globe - with melting ice and more open waterways - is well documented. Recently, more attention has turned to what impact weather conditions are having on the seal population.

Those against the hunt say it is not sustainable because volatile ice conditions are causing seals to die in greater numbers.

Global Action Network claims the Canadian government's "agenda to exterminate seals" comes at a time when climate change is "causing the very habitat of the ice-breeding seals to disappear".

But the sealers say global warming is being improperly used to undermine the hunt.

"There is a huge differ-ence between climate and weather," says Jim Winter, founding president of the Canadian Sealers' Association. He describes the claims that climate change is creating an unsustainable hunt as "disingenuous at best and manipulative at the worst".

Phil Jenkins, an official at Canada's department of fisheries and oceans, says: "We keep track of the ice itself and over the years we have known situations where we have poor ice, or poor ice for a seal."

The government sets quotas every year for how many seals can be killed, based on a list of variables. Last year the ice was so thick off the coast of Newfoundland that sealers had to be rescued in their boats by coast guard ice-breakers.

"Usually we incorporate ice condition in our regular advice, but last year was such an unusual condition that we provided an update, once we saw what was going on," adds Dr Garry Stenson, a colleague of Mr Jenkins.

Seals are sensitive to the environment and rely on the presence of ice to deliver and nurse their pups. Ice cover is also important because new-born pups do not have fully developed swimming abilities and can easily drown if the ice sheets break apart.

"As conditions change, the conditions of the females change, their reproductive rates will change," says Dr Stenson.

The government says this is the type of variable it factors in when setting the annual quota. For example, in the Gulf of St Lawrence last year "we assumed a very high mortality in the southern gulf, but that's 25 per cent of the whole population", says Dr Stenson. The quota was reduced from 325,000 to 270,000. This year's total allowable catch is set at 275,000.

The Canadian government reports that the country's seal population is flourishing and, at almost 6m, is nearly triple that of the 1970s. Anti-hunt campaigners say these numbers are inflated.

Paul Watson, one of the leading figures in the campaign, has been making headlines since the late 1970s, sailing his ship, the Farley Mowat, into icy waters to try to stop the hunt. He says each year he sees the direct effect of global warming on the ice.

"It's been going on for years and it's getting worse. I don't think the government takes any of that into account," he says. Despite the changes in the ice conditions, Mr Watson says he will continue making the dangerous trek every year, but adds: "I will be happy to no longer go back there."

For the sealers, ice conditions and extreme weather are part of the job, says Mr Winter. "Any time you untie the lines you take a risk."
