 Sunday, July 12, 2009 344 mots

Patents spat looms at climate change meeting
By Frances Williams in Geneva

Ways of averting a damaging clash over patents at a climate change meeting later this year, pitting the US against the big emerging economies, will top the agenda at a conference organised by the UN's intellectual property agency that opens on Monday.

At the G8 summit in Italy last week, China, backed by India and Brazil, repeated its call for easier access to patented clean energy technologies in return for signing on to a new global climate change accord in Copenhagen in December.

China, in a submission last year to the UN body handling negotiations on the accord, called for new rules allowing confiscation of patents through compulsory licensing of "environmentally sound technologies".

India and Brazil say they want explicit recognition that compulsory licensing can be used in the interests of mitigating climate change under World Trade Organisation intellectual property rules, drawing parallels with a 2001 WTO declaration relating to intellectual property and public health.

Alarmed US industry groups, with strong support in the Congress, are pressing the Obama administration to resist any weakening of patent protection in the Copenhagen talks, raising fears among environmental groups that wrangling could scuttle an accord aimed at limiting global greenhouse gas emissions.

In May, the US Chamber of Commerce launched a Coalition for Innovation, Employment and Development specifically to lobby for maintaining strong IP rights in the climate change and other international negotiations. The coalition argues that patents, copyright and trademarks are essential to stimulate innovation.

However, more neutral experts, including the World Intellectual Property Organisation, organiser of the two-day conference on IP and public policy, say more creative use of the existing system could enable a wider spread of clean technologies without recourse to confiscation of patents.

David Lammy, UK minister for intellectual property, who will speak at the conference on Monday, says that in addition to more voluntary licensing of technologies such as solar power and fuel cells, poorer countries need help to develop their own knowledge base.

Incentives he will mention include cross-national research collaboration, patent pooling and "licences of right", which cut patent fees if rights holders agree to license their invention to anyone requesting it.

With China, the UK is developing model agreements for collaboration on research and development to ensure the benefits of innovation are both shared and protected. Hillary Clinton, US secretary of state, said earlier this year she hoped to explore collaborations between universities in the US and China "where we can jointly develop intellectual property, where we can jointly come up with new technologies".
