 WORLD NEWS, Thursday, August 14, 2008 552 mots, p. 4

US presidential candidates resist watering down climate plans

At an interaction last week with voters in Indiana, Barack Obama was asked what his highest priorities would be in his "first 1,000 days in office". Ahead of universal healthcare and ending the Iraq war, the first item on Mr Obama's list was comprehensive energy reform.

Observers of the increasingly commuter-focused presidential debate in the US could be forgiven for thinking that the pain of high petrol prices has driven the issue of global warming off the political agenda.

But they would be wrong. Both Mr Obama and John McCain are promising to implement radical cap-and-trade plans that would curb US carbon emissions - in Mr McCain's case a 60 per cent cut below 1990 levels by 2050, in Mr Obama's an 80 per cent decline.

Given the economic climate, neither candidate finds much profit in drawing attention to their plans - and when they do it is usually in the context of achieving "energy independence" rather than tackling global warming. Yet neither has given in to the temptation to water them down.

"I hate to be fair to the Obama campaign but it is remarkable that we have two presidential candidates who are proposing mandatory plans to reduce -America's carbon emissions," says Douglas Holtz-Eakin, Mr McCain's senior economic policy adviser.

That is where the similarity ends. The difference between Mr McCain's plan, which would initially -allocate tradeable carbon permits for free, and Mr Obama's, which would start with a 100 per cent auction of permits, is large.

The McCain camp describes its opponent's plan as imposing too steep a burden on businesses too quickly without easing the transition costs.

The Obama campaign describes Mr McCain's plan as a recipe for "corporate welfare" since it would incentivise Washington's corporate lobbyists to push for more free permits to be awarded to their sectors.

"The lesson from the European experience is that you don't want to give away -permits - you should move immediately to a marketdetermined price for carbon," says Jason Furman, Mr Obama's economic policy director. "You should aim for as much predictability and reliability as possible in terms of the number of -permits. And you should ensure the carbon caps are as comprehensive as possible. McCain meets none of these criteria."

Mr Obama's plan promises to allocate $15bn (€10bn, $8bn) of the annual revenues from the auctions to investment in alternative energy and to create 5m "green-collar jobs" over the next decade. A large part of the remainder of the proceeds would be returned to consumers to help them deal with the transition effect of higher carbon prices.

Mr McCain, in contrast, has yet to develop a clear formula for how to allocate the permits and what to do with the much smaller -proceeds.

The shorter the time -horizon, the larger the differences between the two. Mr McCain, who has been portrayed by Democrats as being increasingly in the "pocket of big oil companies", has poured scorn on Mr Obama's alleged reluctance to consider mainstream alternatives to imported oil, such as nuclear power, new coal plants or lifting the moratorium on offshore drilling in the US.

Describing his energy plan as "all of the above", Mr McCain has attracted criticism for proposing a temporary waiver on the federal petrol tax at the pump - a move that Mr Obama dismisses as a gimmick. But Mr Obama has gimmicks of his own, in the view of most economists, including his continued support for subsidising corn-based ethanol production.

Both are playing short-term politics with high -petrol prices. But neither has so far wavered from his commitment to impose a cap-and-trade system.

"Setting up a cap-and-trade system is a strong -priority for Senator McCain that he is committed to -pursuing early into his first term," said Mr Holtz-Eakin. "He has been committed for many years to achieving this goal."

Whichever candidate wins the election, much of corporate America might suddenly find it has a battle on its hands.

"We are completely opposed to setting up a US system of cap-and-trade until you have a treaty that includes China and India," says William Kovacs at the Chamber of Commerce in Washington.

"Even then, we don't believe in imposing mandatory targets. We would -continue to lobby against it whoever is putting it -forward."
