 WORLD NEWS, Saturday, December 13, 2008 463 mots, p. 9

Europe sets targets on climate for all to follow
By Tony Barber in Brussels

European Union leaders urged the world to follow their example yesterday and adopt ambitious climate change targets, rebuffing critics who said their latest plan conceded too much to heavy industrial polluters.

"Our message to our global partners is, 'Yes, you can. Yes, you can also do what we are doing'," said José Manuel Barroso, the European Commission president, in a turn of phrase that recalled the election slogan of Barack Obama, the US president-elect.

Mr Barroso was speaking after a two-day summit at which the EU's 27 national leaders endorsed a 20 per cent cut in carbon dioxide emissions by 2020 and a €200bn ($266bn, £179.6bn) fiscal stimulus to haul Europe out of recession.

The climate change deal ran into immediate criticism from environmentalists and leftist critics in the European parliament, without whose approval the agreement cannot be passed into binding legislation next year, as EU leaders want.

"The climate package deal represents some kind of step forward, but it falls far short of the action we need to take to combat climate change," said Monica Frassoni, co-president of the parliament's Greens political group.

Industrial sectors such as cement, chemicals and steel will receive free carbon emission permits at least up to 2020, instead of having to buy them under an auction scheme, as envisaged in a Commission plan published last January.

The concession represented a victory for Germany, by far Europe's largest manufacturing nation. It means revenues from the auctions are expected to be closer to €30bn a year by 2020 than the €50bn previously forecast.

For central and east European countries that are burdened with highly polluting power sectors from the communist era, a deal was struck to ease the financial pain of switching to a low-carbon economy. They will be offered a share of the revenues from permit sales to help them invest in cleaner technologies, and their power sectors will be partly exempt from paying for permits between 2013 and 2020.

Nicolas Sarkozy, the president of France, which hands over the EU's six-month rotating presidency to the Czech Republic on January 1, said the summit negotiations on climate change "turned out to be much easier than people predicted".

"We are starting to change the way we do things in Europe, talking less and doing more," Mr Sarkozy declared.

EU diplomats said pressure from industrialists on the climate change plans had been relentless this year and had become impossible to resist once it was clear Europe had fallen into a serious recession and risked losing millions of jobs.

Mr Barroso acknowledged the terms of the accord created the risk of windfall profits for some of the EU's biggest polluters. "It's precisely why we at the Commission don't like the extension of the allowances. But sometimes you have to do a deal," he said.

The leaders agreed unanimously on the fiscal stimulus plan, worth about 1.5 per cent of the EU's gross domestic product, and called on Mr Obama to join them in a "transatlantic economic recovery plan".

But at German, Dutch and Swedish insistence they stressed the need for a prompt return to fiscal discipline, under the EU's stability and growth pact, after the emergency was over.

The leaders stopped short of backing the use of €5bnin unspent EU budget funds to expand trans-European energy links and broadband internet connections, and asked the Commission instead to come up with precise proposals.
