 Friday, December 18, 2009 913 mots

Climate deal only an 'essential beginning'
By Fiona Harvey, Ed Crooks and Andrew Ward in Copenhagen

The Copenhagen climate conference ended on Saturday without unanimous agreement as the world's biggest economies backed a limited accord that leaders said would form the basis for a future deal to tackle global warming.

Ban Ki-moon, UN secretary-general, acknowledged that the outcome was "not everything we hoped for" but described it as an "essential beginning" as he brought a close to two weeks of fractious negotiations in the Danish capital.

Talks had continued through Friday night into Saturday morning in a bid to reach consensus on a tentative agreement struck between the US, China and other big emerging economies on cuts in greenhouse gas emissions and financing to help developing countries cope with climate change.

But several developing countries, led by Venezuela and Bolivia, refused to endorse the deal, ensuring that the conference would end without an official agreement. Instead, all 193 countries agreed to "take note of the Copenhagen Accord" without committing to accept it.

European Union leaders gave a tepid endorsement to the accord, which they described as the first of "many more steps" needed to curb rising temperatures, but made clear their deep disappointment over the weakness of the commitments and their non-binding nature.

Mr Ban said work must now start to forge broader consensus behind a concrete deal. "We must transform this into a legally binding treaty next year," he said. "The importance will only be recognised when it's codified into international law."

Hopes of a deal had risen on Friday evening when President Barack Obama hailed a "meaningful agreement" after intensive talks with leaders of China, Brazil, India and South Africa appeared to have broken the deadlock between rich nations and the developing world.

But the EU said the US declaration was premature and negotiations dragged on for several more hours after Mr Obama left Copenhagen until EU leaders eventually announced their reluctant backing for the deal at 2am.

Mr Obama acknowledged that the deal was "not sufficient to combat the threat of climate change but [was] an important first step" on cutting greenhouse gases.

"We have made a meaningful and unprecedented breakthrough. For the first time in history, all of the major economies have come together to take action [on global warming]," he said after meetings with Wen Jiabao, the Chinese premier, Manmohan Singh, the Indian prime minister, President Luiz Inácio Lula da Silva of Brazil and Jacob Zuma, the South African president.

The extent of China's backing for the accord is still unclear, however. Mr Obama said on Friday night that he had reached agreement with Mr Wen on Beijing backing the accord. But on Saturday morning China's representative insisted the accord was neither adopted nor endorsed as a formal decision at the meeting.

José Manuel Barroso, the European Commission president, said the outcome fell "far short of our expectations", adding: "Our level of ambition has not been matched."

Several countries, including Sudan, which heads the G77 group of developing nations, voiced outright opposition, raising doubts over whether a deal struck by an elite group of big industrialised and emerging economies could secure the broad international support needed to turn it into a binding treaty to replace the 1997 Kyoto protocol.

Mr Obama acknowledged that further talks were needed but voiced confidence that the Copenhagen accord would form the basis for a lasting deal.

"What we have achieved in Copenhagen will not be the end but the beginning of a new era of international action," he said. "This is going to be hard. It's hard within countries, and it's going to be even harder between countries."

The agreement contained a commitment to try to hold global warming to no more than 2 degrees Celsius, a level scientists have suggested is probably the limit of safety, beyond which climate change could become catastrophic and irreversible.

Rich countries have also included commitments to cut their emissions and developing countries to curb the growth of theirs. There were also promises to transfer money from rich to poor countries, to help them tackle climate change.

But Fredrik Reinfeldt, prime minister of Sweden, holder of the rotating EU presidency, warned that the accord was not sufficient to meet the 2°C target.

"This is not a perfect agreement," he said. "It will not solve the climate threat."

Lumumba Di-Aping, the Sudanese head of the G77, said the US-backed proposals represented the "lowest level of ambition" and would be devastating for the world's poor.

"This is an idea not a deal," he told reporters. "If any country rejects the deal, then there is no deal. Sudan will not be a signatory to a deal that destroys Africa."

Venezuela described the accord as a "coup d'etat" by wealthy countries.

Sergio Serra, Brazil's ambassador for climate change issues, described the result of the talks as "disappointing". He added: "There is a big job ahead to avoid climate change through emissions reduction targets, and that was not done here."

Mexico said it would embrace the Copenhagen accord when it takes over the presidency of the UN climate talks next year and hoped to agree a "legally binding instrument" at the next conference , which it will host.

Felipe Calderón, Mexican president, acknowledged the proposals were "far from what we expected and from what the world needs" and described it as "the basis for a future agreement".

One key sticking point to a deal was China's refusal to allow international monitoring of its emissions. But in a last-minute compromise, Beijing and Washington agreed to a process of "international consultation and analysis".

Mr Obama held two meetings with the Chinese premier to try to resolve the issues. The second meeting, which was also attended by the leaders of India, South Africa and Brazil, lasted for four hours, officials said.

Countries had been negotiating in the Danish capital for two weeks, hoping to forge a new settlement that would be the first to require developed and developing countries to take action on greenhouse gas emissions.

Brazilian representatives said negotiators in Copenhagen would continue their work over the weekend, and into next year in the hope of having a legally binding document that can be signed by the end of 2010 and then ratified by national parliaments before the end of 2012. That is the expiry date of the main provisions of the Kyoto protocol, the world's only existing accord that binds countries to cut emissions, but only applies to the rich world.

Hugo Chávez, president of Venezuela, declared: "The meeting unfortunately has not been successful. It has failed...[Because] of the lack of political will by a group of countries led by the imperial government of the United States."

He accused Denmark and its wealthy allies of "pulling a document from nowhere" that ignored the interests of developing countries.
