 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR, Wednesday, June 3, 2009 249 mots, p. 8

America must act fast and decisively on climate change

From Mr Thomas L. Fraser.

Sir, You are correct to observe that US energy secretary Steven Chu's recent comments on the Obama administration's stance toward energy and climate change are sobering ("Professor Chu goes to Washington", Editorial, May 29). But let's not under-emphasise a bigger point: a US administration is at last addressing climate change in a scientific, realistic and politically pragmatic manner.

You are absolutely right that Barack Obama and Mr Chu must redouble their efforts to build support for a cap-and-trade regime or a tax on carbon. With the establishment of a price on carbon, market mechanisms will engage and individual and private-sector priorities, investment and behaviour will quickly adapt.

The Obama administration must address two central facts. First, the US and China emit approximately half of all greenhouse gases. If the US and China do not successfully address climate change, game over. The US must do as much as possible to constructively engage and work with China on climate change.

Second, given the enormity of the necessary investment and the difficult straits in which we find government budgets, government spending alone cannot be expected to meet the challenge of climate change. Thus, the private sector must invest in climate change-related projects and technologies in a highly significant manner. For this to happen, the Obama administration must do much more to get in place commercially-viable, predictable, long-term investment incentives and tax policies. The numbers have to work.

By adopting a scientific, pragmatic approach to climate change and energy policy, the Obama administration has made important progress. But now is not the time to let up. The Copenhagen negotiations are scheduled to be concluded at the end of this year. The world is looking to Washington for leadership and an example. Now is the time for decisive action.

Thomas L. Fraser,

New York, NY, US
