 WORLD NEWS, Friday, December 3, 2010 348 mots, p. 10

Cancún feud hits climate deal talks
By Fiona Harvey in Cancún

Clash between rich and poor countriesVoters' concerns on global warming fall

A dispute between developing nations and richer signatories to the Kyoto protocol is threatening the fragile peace at international talks on climate change, even as a poll found global warming had slipped down voters' agendas.

Poor countries at the two-week conference in Cancún, Mexico, want a continuation of the 1997 Kyoto pact as a condition for discussions on a new treaty that would encompass the US - which never ratified Kyoto - and impose obligations on major emerging economies, which were not required to curb emissions under the original treaty.

Japan has openly opposed continuing Kyoto after its current provisions expire in 2012, prompting the Indian government on Thursday to say the chance of achieving a "positive outcome" at Cancún was "remote".

The disagreement threatens to kill any chance of measurable progress at the talks, which started on Monday and will continue until December 10.

Ministers will arrive at the conference next week. If the delegates cannot find common ground before then, participants fear simmering tensions could deteriorate into open fighting.

Rifts between developing and developed countries prevented a comprehensive deal at last year's Copenhagen summit, and little has been done to heal the divide since then. Meanwhile, a survey has shown climate change is less important to the public than it was in the lead-up to last year's global warming summit in Copenhagen, which was attended by leaders of the world's major economies.

The GlobeScan poll of more than 13,000 people in 26 countries found that the proportion of people rating climate change as a "very serious" problem fell from 61 per cent to 53 per cent.

In the US, 41 per cent of people said it was "very serious" compared with 45 per cent previously, while in the UK and Germany the difference was even more marked.

In the UK, 43 per cent now rate it "very serious" compared with 59 per cent before. In Germany the figures are 47 per cent, down from 61 per cent.

Despite growing public indifference, scientists at the Cancún conference say the problem is getting worse.

Research from the World Meteorological Organisation, unveiled at the conference, showed that 2010 is set to be one of the three warmest years on record.

Professor Mark Maslin, director of the Environment Institute at University College London, said: "Those who hoped that global warming would just go away will be disappointed by today's announcements [which] add to the huge weight of evidence accumulated by scientists over the last two decades showing climate change is real."
