 National, Tuesday, April 28, 2009 395 mots, p. A 16

U.S. Ready to Lead on Climate Pact, Clinton Says
By JOHN M. BRODER

WASHINGTON - After eight years largely on the sidelines of the international policy debate on climate change, the United States is prepared to lead negotiations toward a new global warming treaty, Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton said Monday.

"The United States is fully engaged and determined to lead and make up for lost time both at home and abroad," Mrs. Clinton told delegates from 16 countries at a State Department conference on energy and climate. "We are back in the game."

The meeting in Washington was the first of three planned sessions among the participating countries, who together account for roughly 75 percent of emissions of the gases blamed for the heating of the planet. Officials said the conference, the Major Economies Forum on Energy and Climate, was intended to supplement, not replace, broader talks that begin in Copenhagen in December to write a new international treaty to replace the Kyoto Protocol.

The Kyoto accord, which was negotiated in 1997 by the United Nations and expires in 2012, set emissions targets for industrialized nations, but many have not met them. The United States never ratified the treaty, in part because it did not include growing economies like China and India.

Mrs. Clinton said there was no longer any question that growing atmospheric concentrations of carbon dioxide and other gases were causing a warming of the planet, with potentially catastrophic results. She said global climate change posed environmental, economic, health and security challenges that must be addressed by individual countries and by the community of nations.

Speaking directly to representatives of developing nations, who are skeptical of the motives of the United States and other industrialized countries on the issue, Mrs. Clinton that the United States would not seek to limit the use of energy in the developing world but would help make it cleaner.

"We want your economies to grow," she said as representatives of Brazil, China, India and Indonesia listened. "We want your people to have a higher standard of living."

Dinesh K. Patnaik, a member of the Indian delegation, said his country was glad to see the Obama administration taking climate change seriously and devoting significant money and political attention to the issue.

Mr. Patnaik said India and other developing nations hoped the talks would establish a level of trust with the industrial world that had so far been lacking.

"We want assurances that the developed countries will not renege on their commitments," he said, adding, "The United States cannot solve the world's problems, but the problems cannot be solved without the United States."

The meeting concludes Tuesday. American officials said they did not expect the group to issue any major policy statements.
