 Metropolitan, Sunday, October 11, 2009 403 mots, p. WE 12

SPOTLIGHT WHITE PLAINS

Climate Change as Comics Art
By LAURA JOSEPH MOGIL

On one wall of the Arts Exchange here, humorous depictions of arctic animals in the midst of global warming include a polar bear playing a grand piano while drifting on a melting glacier. On another wall, a comic strip has a family of four struggling to find a suitable vacation spot as temperature swings turn ordinarily moderate locales into burning-hot and freezing-cold destinations.

First shown at the 2008 Fumetto Internationales Comix-Festival, the illustrations are part of an exhibition, through Nov. 10, in the Grand Banking Room of the Arts Exchange, the headquarters of ArtsWestchester.

" 'Fumetto' is the Italian word for comics," said Janet Langsam, executive director of ArtsWestchester. "Literally translated, it means 'little puff of smoke' and refers to the speech bubbles, or balloons, that contain the dialogue in a comic strip."

Compelling because of their artistic vision, narrative voice and humor, fumetti have long been a popular form of creative expression in many European countries. While similar to American comic books in that they tell a story over a series of frames, fumetti are known for addressing social and political issues.

The nine fumetti on display at the Arts Exchange are reproductions of the winning entries chosen from works submitted by about 1,000 artists and illustrators, representing 30 countries, in the 2008 fumetto festival.

The festival, which has been held in Lucerne, Switzerland, for 18 years, is the largest comics competition in Europe. Each year, contestants are asked to create comics addressing a specific theme, and in 2008 it was climate change. The festival was sponsored by Swiss Re, an international reinsurance company, which is also sponsoring the Arts Exchange exhibition.

In addition to the competition winners, the gallery is displaying the work of two Westchester artists who answered an open call to create and submit comics illustrations on the same theme. One of them, Adam Zucker, from Ardsley, responded with several pieces, including "Melt," an acrylic-on-canvas painting that depicts a crying glacier. Among the works by the other artist, Mike D'Ariano of White Plains, is an acrylic-and-marker painting on canvas called "Hummer," showing a bright yellow S.U.V. siphoning the life out of a bare tree. His painting "Lower" depicts the earth heating up in a microwave oven.

"I think of fumetto as serious comics, or comics with a twist of irony," Ms. Langsam said. "In substance and content, fumetto are different than the comics we're used to seeing in the United States. They might look similar, but they're not meant to be Superman and Lois Lane."

Ms. Langsam said she hoped the exhibition would open a dialogue about climate change and sustainability. "It's definitely a great way to address serious topics," she said, "using humor and inventiveness to get our attention in a way that statistics can't." LAURA JOSEPH MOGIL

"Fumetto," through Nov. 10, Tuesday through Saturday, noon to 5 p.m., in the Grand Banking Room of ArtsWestchester's Arts Exchange, 31 Mamaroneck Avenue, White Plains. Free. (914) 428-4220 or artswestchester.org.
