 Foreign, Tuesday, December 15, 2009 638 mots, p. A 17

REPORTER'S NOTEBOOK

Left Out in the Cold At the Climate Talks
By ELISABETH ROSENTHAL and TOM ZELLER Jr.

COPENHAGEN - With the temperature below zero and a light snow falling, it was easy to feel jealous of the protesters in chicken suits. At least they were warm.

As talks broke down briefly in the Bella Center, the site of international climate talks here, things were not going much better outside. Thousands of participants, from national delegates to representatives of advocacy groups to world-class scientists, faced four-hour waits to pick up credentials for the conference's second and final week.

While vegans offered sandwiches and the people in chicken costumes demonstrated on behalf of animal welfare, many in the line were frantically dialing cellphones to seek an alternative way in or to apologize for missed meetings.

Among them was Anand Patwardhan, a professor specializing in climate adaptation technology who is a member of the Indian delegation and who had just gotten off a plane from Mumbai.

"I can't believe this," he said exhaustedly.

At one point several hundred participants, including college students from Pennsylvania and a Korean businessman in a dark suit, pushed up against the gates, chanting: "Let us in. Let us in."

Officials from the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change attributed the delays to "a capacity problem." When the conference center reached its legal capacity of 15,000, the Danish police refused to admit more people until others left, said John Hay, a spokesman.

Yet the United Nations has allowed 45,000 people to register. "Up to now, we've allowed everyone to participate who wants to and who has a legitimate stake in climate change," Mr. Hay said. That includes big delegations from universities and trade unions, as well as 3,500 journalists.

"We have been overwhelmed," he said. Still, the freezing participants "haven't missed a lot today," he noted dryly, citing the temporary breakdown in talks.

Move Over, Al Gore

It could be called "An Inconvenient Truth, Part 2."

A new film on climate change screened Sunday night at the Staerekassen Theater in central Copenhagen illustrates the consequences of a global rise in temperature of one degree Celsius, two degrees, three degrees and, finally, four degrees with gorgeous imagery shot mostly in Greenland.

The premiere of the film, "One Degree Matters," was organized by the European Environment Agency as part of a new Web-based campaign called Bend the Trend, in which the agency invites people to make specific online pledges to generate fewer heat-trapping emissions. The promised emissions cuts are then calculated and summed up at the Bend the Trend Web site.

To start the project, Jacqueline McGlade, a marine biologist and executive director of the agency, a nongovernmental entity affiliated with the European Union, pledged at a public event to buy a new, more efficient heater for her home.

She then had other event sponsors do likewise onstage. Volker Liebig of the European Space Agency said he would give up his car. Or, he said, backtracking slightly, he would use it only when no public transport was available. Claus Andersen, an executive with Microsoft, promised to substitute videoconferencing for flying on 10 business trips next year.

Will It Play in New York?

Michael R. Bloomberg just doesn't understand wind-turbine detractors.

After flying in unapologetically in his private jet, the New York mayor donned an orange rubber jumpsuit for a 20-minute helicopter trip over the North Sea to view a field of 91 giant turbines, the world's largest wind farm.

Back home, the mayor is hoping that a consortium linking government agencies and utilities will soon begin fielding proposals for a 700-megawatt wind farm that could cost up to $3 billion.

"It's very impressive," Mr. Bloomberg said, standing on a multistory offshore rig planted amid the rotating blades. "It gives you a feeling for what it will be, I hope, off the Long Island shore."

Of course, offshore wind proposals in New York have struggled for acceptance in the past, partly because residents objected to what they saw as a blighted view.

"I don't understand what there is to complain about," Mr. Bloomberg said as the craft swooped low along a bank of turbines 13 miles off the Danish coast. "Would they rather be staring at a coal plant?"

From the shore, the turbines at the Danish wind farm can just be made out -- tiny dots along the horizon -- on a clear day.

Invoking the work of Olafur Eliasson, the sculptor who fashioned manmade waterfalls at four spots along the New York waterfront last year, the mayor said, "He would do something like this, and we'd all ooh and ahh."
