 National, Saturday, February 7, 2009 475 mots, p. A 12

Environmental Views, Past and Present CLIMATE: The Legacy of Kyoto
By ANDREW C. REVKIN

CLIMATE

The Legacy of Kyoto

The public view of Mr. Bush's record on global warming was largely set by his blunt rejection of the Kyoto Protocol, his swift abandonment of his campaign pledge to restrict some greenhouse gases and the disclosures of interference by presidential appointees with government climate scientists.

But now, with many adherents of the Kyoto climate pact struggling to meet its targets, some climate policy experts say that, in efforts to draw up a new treaty, Mr. Bush may have left useful groundwork behind.

Particularly useful were meetings late in Mr. Bush's tenure that brought together a group of rich and poor nations responsible for 80 percent of the human output of heat-trapping gases like carbon dioxide.

The idea was to devise partnerships within sectors like transportation and steel-making that could curb gas releases without the complexity of negotiating among nearly 200 countries in the climate-treaty talks.

Eileen Claussen, the president of the Pew Center on Global Climate Change, said the meetings helped frame some steps China could take that might satisfy senators worried about jobs flowing to Asia under a flawed climate deal.

Measurable action by China is vital if Mr. Obama is to gain Senate approval for any climate treaty resulting from international talks culminating in December in Copenhagen. China has so far resisted mandatory limits on emissions and is building new coal-fired power plants at a rapid pace.

Over all, Ms. Claussen said, Mr. Bush's climate legacy is mainly one of delay and lost opportunities.

Through most of his presidency, Mr. Bush largely framed his approach to global warming around two talking points: the uncertainties in forecasts of a dangerously human-heated world and the certainty that economic harm would come from mandatory cuts in emissions of heat-trapping gases.

A result was a series of mainly voluntary climate and energy initiatives intended to slow the release of such gases, with no commitment to binding reductions at home or abroad.

Mr. Obama has taken precisely the opposite tack. He spoke late last month of the specter of "violent conflict, terrible storms, shrinking coastlines" and other perils from unchecked warming, while pressing his vision of prosperity rebuilt around clean cars and pollution-free power from the wind and sun.

Many analysts say that Mr. Obama must navigate among an array of campaigners, lobbyists and lawmakers with particular interests -- from dependency on coal to aversion to power lines or nuclear plants. But if he makes too many political compromises, he may find that his plan fails on environmental grounds.

"That is why he must educate a public grappling with uncertain science and a grinding recession that work on long-term energy and climate security cannot be deferred until better times," said Kimberly Thompson, who teaches risk management at Harvard.

Aides to Mr. Bush who dealt with the environment and energy insist that they left plenty for Mr. Obama to build on, including greatly increased financing for nonpolluting energy sources and a 30 percent increase in energy-efficiency standards for government buildings.

James L. Connaughton, the former chairman of the White House Council on Environmental Quality, blamed environmentalists, as well as Congress, for some of the lack of progress on new energy options.

Congress failed to provide adequate financing for new power lines to distribute electricity from alternative energy sources, Mr. Connaughton said. And many environmental groups, he added, spoke of concerns about global warming but never dropped their opposition to nuclear power, a carbon-free source of electricity. ANDREW C. REVKIN
