 Metropolitan, Wednesday, February 18, 2009 426 mots, p. A 23

City Must Prepare for Effects of Global Warming, Mayor's Panel Says
By MIREYA NAVARRO

New York City must prepare for higher temperatures, more rain and an increased risk of coastal flooding in the coming decades as a result of global climate change, an advisory panel said on Tuesday.

The panel, formed by Mayor Michael R. Bloomberg to study the potential effects of global warming on the city, said that mean annual temperatures in New York could increase by up to 3 degrees and the average sea levels rise by 2 to 5 inches by the 2020s. By the 2080s, temperatures could increase by up to 7 1/2 degrees, and sea levels could rise 12 to 23 inches by the end of the century, the panel said.

Cynthia Rosenzweig, a senior research scientist at the Goddard Institute for Space Studies at Columbia University, who is the chairwoman of the panel, acknowledged that it was difficult to make predictions about the effects of climate change on specific regions and that climate models that attempt to do so carried uncertainties.

But Dr. Rosenzweig said that the main value of the panel's research, which used climate models and local climate data, was to identify risks in order to make the city less vulnerable to them. "We're providing the science by which the City of New York can get ready and prepare," she said.

City officials said that to prepare for the expected effects of climate change, the city should plan to keep cooling centers for people without air-conditioning open longer during heat waves, move critical equipment in city buildings above sea level and incorporate climate changes into the design of buildings, among other measures.

Higher temperatures could mean more brownouts and blackouts in the summer because of heavier electricity use on hot days, panel members said, and more flooding of streets and basements from intense rainstorms.

The panel, made up of scientists and representatives of private companies, presented its findings at a news conference on Tuesday at the Rockaway Wastewater Treatment Plant in Queens, where the Department of Environmental Protection is moving electrical equipment like pump motors and circuit breakers to 14 feet above sea level from 25 feet below sea level.

The issue of how to prepare for uncertain climate changes now goes to a second task force, made up of representatives of public agencies and private companies. That task force is expected to issue its report later this year as part of the timetable set by Mr. Bloomberg in his environmental agenda for New York City.

"Planning for climate change today is less expensive than rebuilding an entire network after the catastrophe," the mayor said in response to the report. "We cannot wait until after our infrastructure has been compromised to begin to plan for the effects of climate change now."

Rohit T. Aggarwala, the director of long-term planning and sustainability in the Mayor's Office of Operations, said that the city's economic crisis should not interfere with preparations for climate change. Much of the financial burden will be shouldered by private companies as they take steps to prepare, and other expenses can be built into the city's budget for capital projects, he said. "You just build it into the way you do business."
