 Editorial, Wednesday, September 16, 2009 312 mots, p. A 30

EDITORIAL

Some Bad Climate News and Some Good

Senators Barbara Boxer and John Kerry have delayed the introduction of their long-awaited climate change bill until the end of this month -- one more sign that Congress will be hard pressed to get a bill to President Obama's desk before the international summit on global warming in Stockholm in December.

The chances of action this year, never all that good, are even slimmer now that the White House and the Senate leadership have pretty much agreed to keep controversial issues -- and a bill limiting greenhouse gas emissions certainly falls into that category -- on the back burner until the health care debate is resolved.

Though smart politics, it is a disappointment to everyone who hoped that the United States would be able to go to Stockholm with a clear strategy in hand.

All is not lost. The Environmental Protection Agency is rolling out rules that, when fully effective, could place limits on at least half the greenhouse gas emissions emitted in this country.

On Tuesday, the E.P.A. and the Department of Transportation jointly proposed standards to improve fuel economy and reduce carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gas emissions in all new cars and light trucks beginning with the model year 2012. The E.P.A. has already sent the White House preliminary proposals involving the regulation of carbon dioxide from large stationary sources, including refineries and power plants.

The agency also continues to fine-tune its finding formally declaring that carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases constitute a danger to human health and welfare. Under the Clean Air Act, an "endangerment finding" must be made before final rules limiting emissions can take effect.

Nobody, including the E.P.A. administrator, Lisa Jackson, believes that one agency can address the complex problem of climate change. Ultimately, Congress will have to produce robust legislation authorizing major public investments in alternative energy sources and putting a price on carbon to unlock private investment.

That is just what the climate change bill approved by the House aims to do and what Senators Boxer and Kerry eventually hope to do with their bill. In the meantime, however, smart regulation can get the ball rolling and, we hope, goad Congress into action.
