 Editorial, Saturday, April 19, 2008 414 mots, p. A 19

OP-ED COLUMNIST

All Atmospherics, No Climate
By CHARLES M. BLOW

The questioning at Wednesday's Democratic presidential debate has been roundly panned, and rightfully so. The moderators spent about 40 minutes on a trite list of recriminations apparently intended to bait the candidates into a "Jerry Springer"-like brawl.

Barack Obama was again asked to address the kerfuffle he caused by labeling rural voters "bitter" and to explain his relationship with the frightening Reverend Wright, and Hillary Clinton was again pushed back on her heels for saying that she had ducked bullets in Bosnia.

When they finally got around to the issues, they were the same ones that we've heard before: Who would best deal with an economy hobbled by predatory banks giving mortgages to anyone who could sign their names? How can we most quickly exit the Iraq debacle? Who would offer more tax relief for the not-so-poor while imposing the fewest new taxes on the not-so-wealthy?

Worthy issues all. But one was missing: the environment.

The League of Conservation Voters, an environmental watchdog group, reports that in the debates in which five Sunday-morning television anchors -- George Stephanopoulos, Tim Russert, Wolf Blitzer, Chris Wallace and Bob Schieffer -- have participated (17 in total) and in their major interviews with the candidates (176 in total) only eight of the 2,372 questions asked have mentioned global warming or climate change.

That omission is baffling because the environment has become a big issue for Americans. Nearly 6 in 10 people responding to a Pew Research Center poll in January said that protecting the environment and dealing with energy problems should be top priorities.

Americans have awakened to some simple and frightening realities. The earth is getting hotter. The world's ice is melting. The sea level is rising, and will continue to do so. How much? That's the question. The answer may largely depend on the course America takes, since we have been the most egregious at treating the air like a sewer for carbon emissions. (Although China may already have caught up.)

Apparently, the moderators didn't get the message. Instead they revived a more trivial issue, allowing a question that called Mr. Obama's patriotism into question for not wearing a flag pin on his lapel. Better to have tied patriotism to the environment and ask whose global warming plan will best ensure that no one will ever have to go to Lower Manhattan and point to the spot in the water where ground zero used to be.
