 Business/Financial, Tuesday, July 1, 2008 566 mots, p. C 4

India Offers 8 Ideals on a Climate Change Policy, but Few Details
By HEATHER TIMMONS

NEW DELHI - The Indian government pledged Monday to devote more attention to renewable energy, water conservation and preserving natural resources in the country's first climate change plan, but it did not set concrete goals or pledge to cap harmful emissions.

During a speech here on Monday, Prime Minister Manmohan Singh acknowledged that climate change was a dangerous problem, but the plan he introduced reinforced India's long-held stance that developed nations created the bulk of the mess and should be responsible for cleaning it up.

"There is a real possibility of catastrophic disruption of the fragile life-sustaining ecological system that holds this world together," Mr. Singh said. India traditionally "treats nature as a source of nurture and not as a dark force to be conquered and harnessed to human endeavor," he said. "There is a high value placed in our culture to the concept of living in harmony with nature."

India will pursue eight national "missions" for sustainable development, Mr. Singh said. They are: pursuing solar energy, urging energy efficiency, creating a sustainable habitat, conserving water, preserving the Himalayan ecosystem, creating a "green" India, creating sustainable agriculture and, finally, establishing what he called a "strategic knowledge platform for climate change."

How much the Indian government will spend on these goals, who will run the efforts and how they will be evaluated was unclear. A spokesman reached in Mr. Singh's office said he could not answer questions about the plan.

India is the fourth-largest emitter of carbon dioxide, the main gas linked to climate change, after the United States, China and Russia, according to the most recent World Bank data. On an individual basis, though, Indians emit far less carbon dioxide than people in those countries and in Europe.

India and China argue that this is how their contribution to climate change should be judged.

According to the World Bank data, the average Indian generates about one-tenth the amount of carbon dioxide as someone in Japan or Europe, and one-twentieth that of an American.

Swift economic growth and huge populations in India and China mean these countries are contributing more to the growth of emissions than developed countries. But, on an individual basis, these nations still produce far fewer pollutants and gases than developed countries.

Scientists in the West and international bodies set up to address climate change say that meaningful change cannot happen without the robust participation of India and China, which needs to come well before per capita emissions reach those of developed countries.

In April, President Bush pledged that the United States would stop the growth of greenhouse gas emissions by 2025, without giving any specifics about how that would happen. The promise was an about-face for the current administration, which has long resisted emission caps and refused to join the Kyoto Protocol on limiting such emissions.

The Indian government is scheduled to attend a meeting of the Group of 8 in July in Japan, and climate change is expected to be a main topic there.

On Monday, Mr. Singh particularly emphasized the solar mission, saying that in India's plan the "sun occupies center stage, as it should, being literally the original source of all energy."

The plan will "look beyond" the government to try to expand solar power in India, he said, a sign that the country will welcome private companies as well.

The plan "reiterates India's position that the country is looking for technology as a solution, and not any mandatory cuts" in carbon dioxide emissions, said Anshu Bharadwaj, the director of the Center for Science, Technology and Policy in Bangalore.

There were no specific targets set for energy efficiency, solar power use or water conservation. China's first climate change plan, released last year, called for improved energy efficiency and expansion of renewable and nuclear energy sources. China set some goals in areas like energy efficiency, but it has already fallen short of them, some analysts contend.
