 Foreign, Wednesday, July 8, 2009 786 mots, p. A 9

Despite Shift on Climate By U.S., Europe Is Wary
By JOHN M. BRODER and JAMES KANTER; John M. Broder reported from Washington, and James Kanter from Brussels.

WASHINGTON - The United States, long a laggard in international efforts to reduce global warming pollution, will arrive at the meeting of the world's major powers in Italy this week carrying a newly assertive message on the dangers of climate change and the steps needed to address it.

The European hosts of the Group of 8 summit meeting welcome the shift. But the new stance also worries them, in part because they fear that the United States is working toward an independent deal with China outside the global negotiating framework.

President Obama has stated a commitment to addressing climate change. That has been followed by the recent passage by the House of a landmark bill that, if also approved by the Senate, would begin to regulate heat-trapping gases. Those moves have given the Europeans, as well as climate scientists and some environmental groups, hope that the United States will take a leadership role in global talks toward a new climate-change treaty.

Angela Merkel, the German chancellor, said during a visit to Washington in late June that she had detected a "sea change" in Washington's approach to climate change since Mr. Obama took office, raising the odds for a successful outcome to the treaty negotiations, to be held in Copenhagen in December.

But Europe is also unhappy with the Obama administration's reluctance to accept aggressive near-term goals for cutting greenhouse gases and its refusal so far to formally accept language that would limit the rise in global temperatures to 2 degrees Celsius, or 3.6 degrees Fahrenheit, above pre-industrial levels.

On Thursday, 17 developed and developing nations will attend a meeting on climate issues in L'Aquila, Italy, during the three-day Group of 8 summit meeting. In a draft of the declaration obtained by The New York Times that is scheduled to be released after the session, the countries say they agree on an "aspirational global goal" of cutting greenhouse gas emissions by 50 percent by 2050, the same target President George W. Bush accepted a year ago at a Group of 8 meeting in Japan.

To achieve that, the draft document states, the United States and other advanced economies will have to reduce their emissions by 80 percent, consistent with Mr. Obama's position and the House climate legislation. Several leaders who will be at the summit meeting are also hoping to overcome Washington's reluctance to setting a temperature target.

The United States, however, has resisted European pressure to set strong goals over the next decade and has insisted on language that leaves vague the starting year against which emissions reductions will be measured. The Europeans wanted 1990, which would require much steeper near-term cuts, while the United States, Australia and Japan preferred a 2005 benchmark.

The draft is still subject to change before it is adopted on Thursday.

Mr. Obama, in an interview a week ago, said he recognized that Mrs. Merkel, other Europeans and many developing nations wanted more from the United States.

"My argument to her and to the Europeans is we don't want to make the best the enemy of the good," Mr. Obama said.

The president and other American policy makers also insist that no deal can effectively reduce emissions unless China, India and other major developing countries are on board. The United States has been pursuing a separate track of climate diplomacy directly with Beijing.

Michael Starbaek Christensen, a senior climate-change official in Denmark, said he was worried that the United States and China -- the two largest emitters of greenhouse gases in the world -- would cut a separate deal and push the rest of the world into a treaty that did too little to curb emissions.

"I can only encourage Europe to stay in the lead and not let a bilateral U.S.-China relationship take over," Mr. Christensen said, "because one concern I would have with the U.S.-China relationship is that they would find a lower common denominator."

Discussions between China and the United States have progressed, but the countries remain far apart on emissions targets, trade measures, technology transfer and payments from rich countries aimed at helping developing nations adapt to the anticipated effects of rising temperatures, surging seas and the clearing of forests. There appears little prospect for resolution of those differences before December.

The draft declaration for the meeting on Thursday says that aid to the poorest and most vulnerable countries is essential, but it does not specify a formula for contributions to such a fund or how the money should be spent.

Industrial countries do appear willing to commit to a smaller, immediate payment to the most vulnerable countries.

As diplomats from around the world wrangle over details, a parallel track is under way that tries to look at concrete actions that can be taken outside of a negotiated international framework.

Hal Harvey, the chief executive of ClimateWorks, a group that supports projects to reduce global warming, says there are steps individual nations are taking in their own best economic and environmental interest that, if accelerated, would go a long way toward easing the challenge of reaching a global deal.

China should do more to improve the energy efficiency of its industries, Mr. Harvey said. The United States and Europe should adopt greener building and appliance standards, he added, while Brazil should alter its forest practices.

Mr. Harvey said that Mr. Obama had begun to speak out on these measures.

"It's such a breath of fresh air for the Obama administration to push for strong and aggressive policies that will flip the dynamic," he said. "Good will is higher than ever. But that alone is not enough to make it happen. It's going to require some political alchemy."

Figure(s) : 