Foreign, Thursday, March 11, 2010, p. A 11Top Scientists to Review Findings of U.N. Climate Change PanelBy JOHN M. BRODERA group of top scientists from around the world will review the research and management practices of the United Nationsclimate change panel so that it can try to avoid the kinds of errors that have brought its work into question in recent months, officials said Wednesday.Ban Ki-moon, the secretary general of the United Nations, said that the InterAcademy Council, a consortium of the world's most prestigious scientific societies, would name scientists to take a thorough look at the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change.The panel has come under sharp attack after revelations of several mistakes in its most recent report, published in 2007, including a poorly sourced and exaggerated account of how quickly the Himalayan glaciers are melting.Scientists and officials say that the panel's finding that the earth is warming -- probably as a result of human activity -- remains indisputable. But critics have used the errors to raise doubts about the credibility of the entire 3,000-page study.At a news conference at the United Nations, Mr. Ban said he was requesting an independent review of the panel to ensure that future reports are comprehensive and free of errors."Let me be clear," he said. "The threat of climate change is real." But he said it was critical that policy makers and the public received complete and impartial scientific evidence to inform any policies for addressing it.The chairman of the climate change panel, Rajendra K. Pachauri, has also faced accusations of conflict of interest for serving as a paid board member of several profit-making energy and financial concerns. The payments go to a nonprofit research center he runs in New Delhi.In an interview, Mr. Pachauri said that he and the hundreds of scientists who contributed to the panel's reports had been taken aback by the volume and intensity of criticism in recent months."We've been through a very critical period," he said. "We've learned, we've listened and we've decided to do something about it. It is important for the public and scientific community to know that we're sensitive to what happened."He acknowledged that he and other climate scientists had done a "lousy job" of communicating what is known and not known about the behavior of the earth's climate and that they had not responded adequately to critics of their work.The review will be led by Robbert H. Dijkgraaf, a Dutch physicist and mathematician who is co-chairman of the InterAcademy Council. The study group will be financed by the United Nations but will operate wholly independently, Mr. Dijkgraaf said at a briefing at the United Nations.He said he was not certain how many members would serve in the group, but said they would represent a variety of scientific disciplines. He expects to complete the review by the end of August, before the I.P.C.C. officially begins work on its next scientific assessment report, which is to be completed in 2014.He said that the group intended to look forward rather than backward and would make recommendations on how to assure the accuracy of the next assessment and on setting standards for the types of publications that can properly be cited.But he also said that the review would include a look at the management of the climate change panel, including Dr. Pachauri's leadership."Our job is to ensure quality of I.P.C.C. reports in the future," Dr. Dijkgraaf said. "We enter this process with no preconceived conclusions."