Foreign, Saturday, December 11, 2010, p. A 12Negotiators at Global Climate Talks Continue Past the Deadline for an AgreementBy JOHN M. BRODER; John Collins Rudolf contributed reporting from New York.CANCUN, Mexico -- Negotiators blew past a self-imposed deadline for reaching an agreement at the United Nations conference on climate change here on Friday, working into the night to try to piece together a package acceptable to the nearly 200 participating countries.It appeared that delegates had resolved many of the most difficult issues, among them how to keep the frayed 1997 Kyoto Protocol from falling apart and how to ensure that countries were making progress toward their goals of reducing emissions that contribute to global warming. The documents that negotiators were debating Friday evening added new details to the bare-bones Copenhagen Accord, reached a year ago at the end of a contentious conference and never formally adopted by the parties.The climate conference was concluding on the same day that NASA announced that the past 12 months had produced the highest land and ocean temperatures ever recorded. The data mean that 2010 is likely to pass 2005 as the warmest year since detailed records have been kept.In this seaside resort, the complex texts produced by negotiators over the past two weeks still needed the approval of the delegates, a process expected to prolong the conference deep into the night. There was no certainty that they would win the consensus that the United Nations process requires.As debate opened late Friday, Todd Stern, the American climate envoy, urged delegates to adopt the proposal, calling it a balanced package that lays the groundwork for future progress. "So let's get this deal done and put the world on a path for a low-emissions and more sustainable future," he said.Patricia Espinosa, the foreign secretary of Mexico and the chairwoman of the talks, had hoped to wrap up the negotiations by 6 p.m. But that deadline passed as the negotiators weighed new language that most of them did not see until late in the afternoon.At stake was not just the success or failure of this conference, the 16th annual meeting under the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change. Many delegates and analysts warned that failure to reach some sort of accord, even a modest, face-saving deal that pushes the tough questions off into the future, could doom the entire process."If we do not get things done here in Cancun, it's very difficult to see how you get from A to B," said Connie Hedegaard, the European Union's top climate negotiator. "If we leave Cancun without getting anything out of this, I think multilateralism has a problem."China and the United States, the world's largest emitters of heat-trapping gases, appeared to have agreed Friday night on a formula for ensuring that all nations were adhering to their pledges to reduce emissions of carbon dioxide and other heat-trapping gases. The accord sets standards for reporting actions each country is taking to cut its emissions, with requirements for detailed statements of data, economic assumptions and methodology. That seemed to satisfy American concerns that countries could manipulate the emissions and economic data they submitted for international review.As technical experts worked on details and diplomatic language, many of the participants were asking broader questions about the future of the talks, which have yet to produce an effective and binding agreement."Climate change is a long-term problem that won't be addressed in one meeting or one agreement," said Robert N. Stavins, director of the environmental economics program at Harvard University and a longtime observer of the United Nations process. "Countries are already taking actions on their own and moving toward international cooperation on these issues. That may be a more productive course than a single, stand-alone, top-down agreement."The climate itself was not waiting for the outcome of the talks. An analysis of average global temperatures released Friday by NASA's Goddard Institute for Space Studies shows that 2010 has so far been the warmest year in its 130-year climate record. The record-breaking temperatures appeared due to a combination of man-made climate change and a natural warming pattern in the tropical Pacific Ocean earlier this year caused by El Nino, according to Kevin Trenberth, head of climate analysis at the National Center for Atmospheric Research in Boulder, Colo.The year was marked by extreme weather events, from a record-breaking heat wave in Russia in July to the dramatic floods in Pakistan. High sea temperatures were also blamed for a global bleaching of coral reefs.A cold snap under way in Britain and northern Europe was unusual, but would do little to alter global average temperatures for the year, said James Hansen, director of the Goddard Institute. "This regional cold spell has caused widespread commentary that global warming has ended," Dr. Hansen said. "That is hardly the case."