Foreign, Wednesday, December 8, 2010, p. A 15U.S. and China Narrow Differences at Climate ConferenceBy JOHN M. BRODERCANCUN, Mexico -- The United States and China have significantly narrowed their differences on the verification of reductions in greenhouse gas emissions, officials said, providing hope that a United Nations conference here on climate change can achieve some modest success.The verification issue, which cuts deeply on matters of national sovereignty and international trust, was a major factor in the torpedoing of last year's climate negotiations in Copenhagen. But China has since significantly softened its position and the United States has moderated its insistence on the issue.The reduced friction between the two nations has greatly improved the mood here, and envoys from both expressed guarded optimism that a deal could be reached by the end of the conference on Friday."I do think there is an agreement to be had," Todd Stern, the chief American climate change negotiator, said Tuesday, although he added, "At the same time there are a lot of difficulties, so we'll have to see."Xie Zhenhua, China's top climate envoy, also signaled a willingness to sign an accord here, as long as it met Chinese objectives on financial aid to developing countries, transfer of clean energy technology to poor nations and a continuing of discussions under the 1997 Kyoto Protocol. Speaking to the press on Monday, he pointedly did not raise verification or transparency issues as a barrier to the negotiations.The overall talks are grinding on slowly, and there is some concern that with only three full negotiating days ahead, there will not be enough time to resolve differences on remaining issues like money, technology, adaptation, emissions reductions and forestry programs, the basic agenda of the climate negotiations.The United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change, under whose auspices these annual talks are held, operates on the principle of consensus, meaning that any of the more than 190 participating nations can hold up an agreement.Last December, a group of nations led by Bolivia, Venezuela, Cuba and Sudan played the role of spoiler in Copenhagen. This year, Bolivia in particular has raised objections on a number of matters, including plans to compensate landowners for preserving forests. The Bolivian leader, Evo Morales, says this threatens the livelihoods of landless peasants, and he plans to address the conference on this issue.There is some talk in the corridors of breaking off the forestry issue and negotiating a separate deal that would save millions of acres of forestland while increasing compensation to countries like Brazil and Indonesia where forests are fast disappearing.Another issue is the fate of the Kyoto Protocol, whose emissions targets expire at the end of 2012. Most developing nations are insisting that new targets be set and that money continue to flow to them for projects that reduce the emissions that contribute to global warming.Japan startled the conference last week by announcing that it would not accept any new targets under the Kyoto Protocol, and Russia, Canada and some other parties to the protocol have also signaled a reluctance to assume new commitments. The issue could scuttle the conference. Some countries, including the United States, which never accepted the Kyoto treaty, hope to find a way to finesse the issue so it can be dealt with in the future.Despite these disputes, the overall atmosphere of the talks is vastly improved from a year ago in Copenhagen, in large part because the United States and China are not at each other's throats. Contributing to that more relaxed mood, the delegates are not awaiting the arrival of 140 heads of state, who flew into Copenhagen for the final hours of negotiations and raised the temperature beyond the boiling point."There is more camaraderie here, more dialogue, more intensive engagement and less shadow boxing than in Copenhagen, because China has moved on the transparency issue," Jairam Ramesh, India's environment minister, said in an interview. "That is very important."Mr. Ramesh proposed a plan for bridging the gap between the United States and China on verification, by establishing a voluntary program known as international consultation and analysis. Under the plan, also known as I.C.A., countries would declare their emissions reduction targets and provide regular reports on how they were meeting them and gauging their own progress.There would be no international monitors or inspectors, and no penalties for failing to reach stated targets. Smaller countries would have less frequent and less detailed reporting requirements than major emitters.Mr. Ramesh's concept has been broadly accepted here, but there are still disputes over how detailed the agreement should be and how soon the reporting requirements would take effect.Mr. Stern said he wanted these matters addressed explicitly and not, as he put it, "at the 50,000-foot level." Other major emitters, including Brazil and South Africa, are balking at providing the kind of detailed reports that the United States is demanding. China's position is unclear, but Mr. Ramesh said that he spent four hours with the Chinese delegation on Sunday and that he was confident that China would not stand in the way of a deal because of the verification issue.He noted that China had recently leapfrogged over the United States to become the world's largest emitter of greenhouse gases. "They know the world's radar is on them," he said. "If transparency becomes the stumbling block, China doesn't want to be blamed. If China is the only party holding out, they won't collapse the negotiations."