Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, March 27, 2010HEATHROW ACTIVISTS HAIL RUNWAY RULING AS A VICTORYRosa Prince Political CorrespondentPLANS for a third runway at Heathrow Airport have been thrown into confusion after the High Court ruled that the proposal must be reconsidered.Green groups, local councils and opposition politicians hailed the finding as a victory, claiming that the decision meant that the policy was "in tatters".But Gordon Brown insisted that the runway would go ahead as planned, saying that expanding Heathrow was the right decision for the economy.A coalition of groups including Greenpeace, the Campaign to Protect Rural England and six local authorities had brought the case, arguing that expanding the airport would breach Britain's legally-binding climate change targets. The judge upheld their complaint, but said that government plans for a further consultation next year were likely to meet his requirement that ministers consider the impact on the environment. He gave the Government and the campaigners until next month to set out the form in which the consultation would take place.Speaking after the ruling, Mr Brown said that he was confident ministers would prove that the runway would not compromise Britain's green targets.He claimed that the Government had backed an extra runway "only after a detailed assessment showing that the strict environmental limits for expansion could be met"."We are taking seriously both the concerns that people have and the need for public consultation," he said."But we took a tough decision, the right decision necessary for the future of Britain and the economy, and a new runway will help secure Britain's economic future." In his ruling, Lord Justice Carnwath said that the Government's policy for the expansion of Heathrow, first set out in 2003, would need to be looked at again, after developments in a number of policy areas in the past seven years, with the climate change debate in particular having moved on.But he added that his decision was not a "show stopper" for the third runway, which could go ahead if the Government's consultation, due next year, met the required legal criteria.The campaigners insisted that the runway was dead, however. In a statement, they said: "If the Government wants to pursue its plans for Heathrow expansion, it must now go back to square one and reconsider the entire case for the runway."The Tories oppose the building of the third runway, and are instead planning to put Heathrow at the heart of a new high-speed rail network.