Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, November 24, 2010FROZEN IN TIME, THE ANCIENT CLUES TO CLIMATE CHANGELouise GrayA BLOCK of ancient Antarctic ice, holding bubbles of air trapped 700 years ago, will go on display for the first time as part of an exhibition designed to help the public understand climate change.The Science Museum is the first institution in the world to put an "ice core" on display. The three-foot-long block was drilled from almost 200ft beneath the surface of the Antarctic in 1989. The ice at this depth was formed hundreds of years ago by falling layers of snow which trapped the air.The core was brought back to Britain as part of efforts to understand the past climate and how greenhouse gases have affected temperatures. Scientists are able to analyse the air trapped in the ice to find out the temperature at the time and the levels of carbon dioxide present.The method has enabled scientists to work out that during an ice age, carbon dioxide levels are relatively low, whereas in the warm periods there is more carbon in the atmosphere.This has prompted concern that the unprecedented growth in carbon since the industrial revolution could lead to catastrophic global warming.Professor Chris Rapley, the director of the museum, said: "Ice cores reveal a record of climate and environmental change covering many hundreds of thousands of years. In my experience, the sight and story of the extraction of ice cores, and what they tell us, never fails to enthral."The ice core will be displayed in a new gallery dedicated to climate change, which will be opened by the Prince of Wales next month.The gallery explores how the climate has changed in the past and could change in the future. Other exhibits include stalagmites and sea sediment.ICE MAGICIce cut from deep below the surface of the Antarctic shows layers of snow that fell hundreds of years ago.Viewed in cross section, an ice core has a series of layers representing decades of snowfall.Scientists can count the layers to work out the approximate age of the ice.Ancient pollen and dust in ice cores can be used to estimate the prevailing wind direction in any given year and find out more about the wider environment.Darker sediments can show volcanic activity or other geological events that also give a clue to age.Tiny bubbles of air trapped in the ice hundreds of years ago allow scientists to measure how much oxygen, carbon dioxide and other gases there were in the atmosphere.Air and water trapped in the snow also show the approximate temperature at the time by measuring isotopes. Scientists can also estimate how much temperature changed by the different gases in the trapped air.