Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, December 4, 2010PRINCE SAYS CLIMATEGATE SCIENTISTS WERE TREATED 'APPALLINGLY'Richard Alleyne Science CorrespondentTHE Prince of Wales has come out in support of the British scientists embroiled in the "Climategate" saga. Yesterday he described their treatment as "appalling".The Prince, a well-known environmental campaigner, has spoken of the threat the planet faces from climate change for many decades.During a speech at London's Science Museum yesterday to open a GBP4.5million Atmosphere gallery, the Prince said that climatescience "has taken a battering of late". This was why in January he had visited the University of East Anglia's School of Environmental Sciences, of which he is patron. It is the home of the Climatic Research Unit (CRU) -- the department at the centre of the Climategate row."I wanted to discuss with them the appalling treatment they had endured during the so-called Climategate row because, as they reminded me, the University of East Anglia is not a campaigning NGO, nor an industry lobby group," said the Prince."It is an academic institution working to understand precisely and dispassionately what is happening to our world; to separate the facts from the fiction and build the sum of human knowledge on the one issue that could very well balloon into the cause of our downfall."Prof Phil Jones, the director of research at the Climatic Research Unit, said yesterday: "I am extremely grateful for Prince Charles's continuing support at the end of what has obviously been a gruelling period in my career."His visit earlier in the year gave great comfort to me and my colleagues in the Climatic Research Unit at a very dark time."To receive such public support from the Prince is a further boost."The Climategate row began when emails from CRU scientists were hacked into and released online last year.Climate change sceptics claimed the messages showed that researchers were manipulating and suppressing data to back up the theory of manmade global warming. Despite three inquiries, the events are still not clear.The final inquiry cleared the scientists of any dishonesty or exaggerating the extent of global warming.But it said they had been "unhelpful" and not suffi-ciently open about research that supported the case for man-made global warming.The Prince has previously criticised climate change sceptics, claiming they used "pseudoscience" and "intimidation" to stop the world from addressing global warming.He said more and more people were listening to the "siren voices" of sceptics who claimed the theory of manmade global warming was a "sinister attempt to undermine the capitalist system".