Telegraph (London, UK) Thursday, December 9, 2010BRITAIN URGED TO LEVY GBP600 A HOME IN GREEN TAXESLouise Gray Environment Correspondent in CancunBRITISH taxpayers should pay GBP600 per year in green taxes to help poor countries cope with the floods and droughts caused by climate change, Lord Stern said yesterday.The economist said Britain would have to contribute about GBP1.5billion from 2020 to a new green fund expected to be set up during the United Nations talks on climate change in Cancun this week.He said the Treasury was unlikely to set up new mechanisms to raise such a small amount of money. it was therefore better to raise 10 times as much and use just 10 per cent for the green fund. The rest could be used to cut other taxes such as VAT and income tax, pay off the deficit or even fund schools.Lord Stern said an extra GBP15billion could be raised in taxes on polluting industry and power from coal, gas and petrol. Although the levies would be directly on factories or power stations, eventually it would come down to the consumers.Such green taxes would cost each British home GBP600 a year, although it is likely to be unevenly distributed as households with more cars or high energy use would pay more."People would see these tax rises through electricity, through cars," said Lord Stern. "This is a story of people paying for the damage they do, this is stopping subsidising pollution."Britain is already paying billions of pounds installing wind turbines and other green energy sources, as part of global efforts to cut carbon emissions.Lord Stern, a former Government adviser who first warned of the costs of climate change, is attending the talks to advise leaders.The green fund is a key element of the talks. It is aimed at helping poor countries to adapt to global warming and helping to develop green technologies such as wind turbines and solar panels.Countries are expected to agree to the principle of the fund and commission further studies into how the money will be raised. A substantial proportion of the money could come from new international taxes on aviation and shipping or on banking transfers. The rest could come from public money contributed by each country.World leaders have agreed that GBP60million a year should be raised by 2020. Most of the money will go through the green fund, although some may come through other existing mechanisms like the World Bank or from the private sector. Britain has accepted that it will pay its fair share towards the green fund but has not yet decided how the money would be raised.Ban Ki-moon, the UN secretary-general, appealed for world leaders to agree a new deal on climate change, warning that "nature will not wait while we negotiate".He referred to talks that collapsed in Copenhagen last year, saying that the world could not afford to get it wrong again.The Copenhagen talks ended with the world's two biggest carbon emitters, China and the US, refusing to sign up to legally binding targets to cut greenhouse gases."I am deeply concerned that our efforts so far have been insufficient," Mr Ban said. "Nature will not wait while we negotiate. Science warns that the window of opportunity to prevent uncontrolled climate change will soon close."