Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, October 5, 2010"WE MUST GO FURTHER AND FASTER ON CLIMATE CHANGE TARGETS"Where is the money coming from to fund the new energy revolution? What kind of regulatory environment is truly commercially relevant? How can government and industry work together to develop the low carbon energy supply we need? In this report published in association with The European Future Energy Forum (EFEF), at ExCeL London, on 19-21 October, we consider the critical issues, with commentary from some of the key personalities. And as the European nations deliver their action plans for renewable energy and carbon reduction, we explore why there has never been a more critical time for global co-operation between investors, business, and policymakers in striving to secure solutions to the world's energy needs.EFEF keynote speaker, Chris Huhne, the UK's Secretary of State for Energy & Climate Change, has said, 'We must go further and faster to turn climate change targets into real action. Energy investors need certainty to make investment decisions. A meaningful carbon price would drive the deployment of clean energy technology and help secure energy supplies. Getting a global deal on climate change, pushing for a 30% cut in EU emissions and the introduction of a carbon floor price in the UK are all part of that.' EFEF, held in association with Masdar and supported by UK Trade and Investment, is Europe's premier thought leadership conference, designed for all with a serious interest in our energy future, including key industry leaders, governments, politicians, engineers, innovators, architects, lobbyists and journalists.The forum will open with keynote presentations from international leaders including Dr. Sultan Al Jaber, CEO, Masdar, Christine Luis, Secretary-General, EREC (European Renewable Energy Council), Chris Huhne, Secretary of State for Energy and  , UK, Lykke Friis, Minister for Climate and Energy, Denmark, Pedro Marin, Secretary of State for Energy, Spain, and Carlos Zorrinho, Vice Minister for Energy and Innovation, Portugal. The cutting edge debate on these issues, will be chaired by Steve Sedgwick, CNBC Anchor, who will put the critical questions to panellists including Kumi Naidoo, Executive Director, Greenpeace International, Thomas Dalsgaard, Vice President, DONG Energy, GillesVermot-Desroches, Sustainable Development Senior VP, Schneider Electric, Matthew Chinn, Managing Director Energy Sector, UK and North West Europe, Siemens, Michael Lewis, Renewables Managing Director, E.ON Climate & Renewables, Peter Gutman, Global Head of Renewable Energy, Standard Chartered Bank, Rob Hastings, Director of Marine Estate, The Crown Estate and David Nussbaum, CEO, WWF-UK.The conference and international exhibition will include specific streams and features dedicated to Infrastructure, Finance, Renewables and Alternatives, Clean Transport and Green Cities. Full details and passes to attend are still available online at www. EuropeanFutureEnergyForum.com Registration for the exhibition and fringe programme of events is free of charge. We very much look forward to seeing you there. Jo Tyler Event Director European Future Energy Forum