Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, November 24, 2010PLEDGES TO CUT CARBON EMISSIONS FAILING TO SAVE WORLDLouise Gray Environment CorrespondentTHE world is heading for destruction as even the most ambitious pledges to cut carbon emissions will fail to halt climate change, the United Nations has warned.Under the Copenhagen Accord, signed at the end of last year, 80 countries promised to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 2020.But even if every target is met it will deliver less than two thirds of the cuts needed to stop global temperatures rising by more than 2C (3.8F). The report casts doubt on the world's ability to tackle global warming as countries prepare to meet for the next round of UN talks in Cancun, Mexico.The talks are aimed at reducing global greenhouse gases to prevent the warming of the atmosphere.Scientists say that if temperatures rise by more than 2C the ice caps could melt and more extreme weather will occur, such as droughts and floods.Achim Steiner, the UN's top representative on the environment, said that unless the targets were increased global warming would rise to dangerous levels.Mr Steiner urged countries to work together through the UN to reach an agreement on climate change. The world is heading for "mutually assured destruction if we do not act", he said.About 48 gigatons (48 billion tons) of greenhouse gases are emitted every year.If countries carry on with "business as usual", emissions will rise to 56 gigatons by 2020, with temperatures to rise by 7C (12.6F).To stand a good chance of limiting temperature rise to 2C, emissions have to fall to 44 gigatons by 2020. But the current pledges would bring emissions down to only 49 gigatons.This gap is the equivalent of taking all the vehicles in the world off the road.Mr Steiner said it would be possible to fill the gap by using new technologies and helping poor nations to switch from fossil fuels to renewables such as wind and solar power.The Copenhagen Accord is a political agreement and Mr Steiner said countries would be encouraged to act by a more "legally binding" agreement in Cancun.Britain will negotiate as part of the European Union bloc at the climate change talks. Dr Keith Allott, the British head of  , urged ministers to try to raise the EU target to help fill the "gigaton gap".Ban Ki-Moon, the UN Secretary General, urged countries to raise targets."I encourage all parties to make good on their national pledges and to further progress within the negotiations as well as through strengthened efforts on the ground to curb emissions," he said. "There is no time to waste."US report criticised: Page 2356 Gigatons of greenhouse gases expected to be emitted by 2020 unless things change