Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, March 13, 2010ROMPING IN READING - AND THE ARCTICLorna BradburySolar by Ian McEwan 283PP, JONATHAN CAPE, GBP18.99 TGBP16.99 (PLUS GBP1.25 P&P) 0844 871 1515 ***Ian McEwan has always done sex with gusto. Who can forget the moment in On Chesil Beach when Edward and Florence's long-awaited sexual union misfires so disastrously in "gouts" of premature fruition; or the tender descriptions in Saturday of the neurosurgeon Henry Perowne rousing his wife from her slumbers?But never before has he used it for a comic end, at least never intentionally. This is the case with his new novel, Solar. Here we have Michael Beard, McEwan's magnificent anti-hero, a philanderer whose fifth marriage is on the rocks, whose body is failing him and whose professional achievements are buried in the past, trying - and, increasingly, failing - to get a woman into bed.There's his fifth wife, Patrice, who abandons him for their builder after learning about his 11 affairs in five years, and whom he tries to get back by feigning a lover in the house they still share. And a subsequent girlfriend, Melissa, a mother substitute into whose generous bosom he gratefully falls - until she traps him with pregnancy and the thrill is lost. To get through a particularly vigorous session with Melissa, Beard has to resort to a fantasy about sex in public with an immigration officer who had previously rejected his advances. And then there's Darlene, a waitress almost as bulky as Beard who, in a wild moment, he promises to marry - an offer he comes to regret as the elements of his life gather around him in the novel's final section.Michael Beard is a comic creation in the same class as Martin Amis's John Self. Indeed, if Money could be seen as the high point of Amis's career, summing up the excesses of the Eighties, so Solar is likely to come to be regarded as the equivalent for McEwan. For this novel takes on the political obsession of our age - climate change - and fashions out of it a satirical masterpiece.McEwan nails Beard in his opening sentence: "He belonged to that class of men - vaguely unprepossessing, often bald, short, fat, clever - who were unaccountably attractive to certain beautiful women." And it is not long before Beard's professional failings are nailed, too. Though he achieved distinction early in his career with the Beard-Einstein Conflation, which earned him a Nobel Prize, he has been coasting on this success for decades. Honorary degrees, after-dinner speeches, positions on committees: all this for a frustrated has-been who compensates for his lack of ideas with an abundance of deviousness.Beard's views on climate change are bracing, to say the least: "There was an Old Testament ring to the forewarnings, an air of plague-of-boils and deluge-offrogs, that suggested a deep and constant inclination, enacted over the centuries, to believe that one was always living at the end of days." But the Blair government is concerned to appear to be taking climate change seriously, so a centre is set up outside Reading - and who is charged to oversee it, but Beard. The hopelessly inefficient institution is run by a yes man in line for a knighthood and spends its time fielding "clean energy" schemes from loners and eccentrics.The research trip Beard is sent on to the Arctic yields some amusing moments for our increasingly farcical hero: the horror of getting into a ski suit, only to realise that one has forgotten to put one's boots on before one's gloves; the challenges of urinating in the Arctic, especially when "his penis had attached itself to the zip of his snowmobile suit". The only solution is to douse it in brandy. Beard, in pain from this incident, and drowning his sorrows in buckets of wine, acts as an amusing foil to the artistic do-gooders around him.McEwan sends up the workings of government and how personal gain is played out at the expense of ideology. Beard's views mutate as the novel progresses and his business interests lead him to champion solar energy in a photosynthesis plant in New Mexico. But McEwan casts his net wide, poking fun at contemporary life, from installation art (Stella Polkinghorne's "scaled-up Monopoly set on a playing field in Catford") to journalism. "Nobel Prof Says No to Lab Chicks" is the headline accompanying a tabloid story reporting Beard's indifference to the matter of why women are under-represented in physics. And all the while he belches his way through piles of junk food.Solar can, at times, seem loose, structured through a series of anecdotes and diversions about Beard's life. It i s only quite far in that it becomes clear just how well plotted and rigorous it is. Though it incorporates a series of styles ranging all the way to slapstick farce, there are few superfluous plot strands. And all roads lead to the dramatically abrupt - though hardly surprising - ending. If Solar is a satisfying read, it is because McEwan plays directly to our expectations. The polar-bear skin that slides too easily on the polished wooden floor, or the alien toolbox in the cupboard - we know that these will amount to something for our hero, and so they do.McEwan is in many ways the closest thing we have to a national novelist - he has won the Booker Prize twice, his books are frequently transferred to the screen and he is the only literary novelist to find himself with any regularity on the bestseller lists. He has long been celebrated as a master of macabre, and of the realist novel, and with Solar he has proved, after the qualified success of Saturday, that he is a fine proponent of the state-of-the-nation novel, too - one delivered not as a polemic, such as the Poet Laureate's poem "Atlas", but as a dark satire. Solar is fun and clever, but the brilliance of its timing, as our scepticism about the received scientific view of climate change grows, means it will come to be regarded as a classic.