Telegraph (London, UK) Thursday, April 1, 2010GREEN LOBBY ATTACKS OBAMA AS HE APPROVES OFFSHORE HUNT FOR OILToby Harnden in WashingtonPRESIDENT Barack Obama faced a backlash from angry environmentalists yesterday after announcing that he was opening up huge areas of American waters to oil and gas drilling.Mr Obama unveiled a policy that could put new platforms along the Atlantic coastline, the Gulf of Mexico and off parts of Alaska.It was welcomed by cries of "drill, baby, drill" from Republicans repeating a slogan from their 2008 election campaign. Their leaders on Capitol Hill claimed credit for encouraging the move and said they were ready to work with Mr Obama. The decision is expected to help the president secure opposition support for a climate change bill."This is not a decision that I've made lightly," Mr Obama said in anticipation of the outcry from environmentalists, stressing that it would be done "in ways that balance the need to harness domestic energy resources and the need to protect America's natural resources".He said he had studied the issue for more than a year and concluded that it was the right decision given the nation's thirst for energy and the need to produce jobs and keep American businesses competitive.Proposed contracts in Alaska's Bristol Bay, however, were cancelled over environmental concerns. Brendan Cummings, senior counsel at the Center for Biological Diversity, said that the announcement was "all too typical of what we have seen so far from President Obama - promises of change, a year of 'deliberation', and ultimately, adoption of flawed and outdated Bush policies as his own".He added: "Rather than bring about the change we need, this plan will further our national addiction to oil and contribute to global warming, while at the same time directly despoiling the habitat of polar bears, endangered whales, and other imperilled wildlife."Phil Radford, Greenpeace executive director, said: "Is this President Obama's clean energy plan or Palin's 'drill baby drill' campaign? "Expanding offshore drilling in areas that have been protected for decades threatens our oceans and the coastal communities that depend on them with devastating oil spills, more pollution and climate change."Mr Obama was capitalising on the upturn in his political fortunes after the passage of the Democratic health care bill to do something that the White House knows will be unpopular with its liberal supporters.The decision was part of a broader strategy, Mr Obama said, that included expanding the production of nuclear power to "move us from an economy that runs on fossil fuels and foreign oil to one that relies more on homegrown fuels" and clean energy."While our politics has remained entrenched along worn divides, the ground has shifted beneath our feet. Around the world, countries are seeking an edge in the global marketplace by investing in new ways of producing and saving energy," he said.An important factor was to attract Republican support for a climate change bill that orders cuts in greenhouse gas emissions and has been stuck in Congress with little prospect of progress towards becoming law.Although the White House presented it as a carefullyconsidered middle ground, environmentalists were shocked by the scope of the drilling. Access to huge areas of the Outer Continental Shelf for exploration has long been a priority for the oil industry. Drilling could take place only 125 miles from Florida.The announcement was accompanied by other energy proposals that could placate environmental groups, including the ordering of 5,000 hybrid vehicles by the US government and tougher fuel effi-ciency standards for new cars.During the 2008 election campaign, Mr Obama said that he backed expanded offshore drilling.