Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, March 27, 2010LOGGING ON: WHY STOVES ARE THE HOT 'MUST HAVE'Adam EdwardsEvery few years, seemingly out of the ether, there emerges a piece of kit that is universally coveted by the homeowning classes. Without this chic object of desire, one's home seems as barren as a yurt in the Gobi desert.In the Seventies, for example, the avocado bathroom suite and the Magimix were the ne plus ultra of the day. In the early Eighties, the zeitgeist bowed before the Breville sandwich toaster (amazing, but true) to say nothing of the naughtyknickeresque ruched blind. In the Nineties one's house could not be counted a home without a Le Creuset casserole dish, kitchen island and granite worktop. More recently the retro-American fridge-freezer and the baby espresso machine have been the siren song.Today, however it is the wood-burning stove after which we lust. A roaring open fire with the heat escaping up the chimney is so yesterday. To be at the cutting edge, one needs a Scandinavian logguzzler that generates more hot air than the Copenhagen climate change conference.The cast-iron heater, like the Toyota Prius and the reusable jute shopping bag, is green and groovy. The stove is feted by the eco-lobby, loved by the parsimonious and all the rage with the fashionistas of Notting Hill, despite the fact that the only wood available in the Royal Borough of Kensington & Chelsea is either from skips or sold at garages in green net bags by the log (about 70p for a log the size of a small bloomer loaf).Making the trendy firebox even more attractive was this month's announcement from the Department of Energy and  , which claimed that a wood-burning stove owner who generated his own electricity could earn 6.5p per kilowatt hour.In the past 12 months, sales of the eco-friendly heaters have risen by more than 300 per cent. Stoves Online, the biggest seller of the wood burners in the country, says that the recent cold snap has seen another massive increase in sales."We had a huge rise in sales in the past two years and another large increase in the past couple of months," said John Nightingale, owner of Stoves Online, who has been making, selling and installing stoves for more than 30 years. Famous owners of these toasty furnaces include Prince of Wales, Hugh Fearnley-Whittingstall, Lily Allen, Alex James, Anne Robinson, Daniel Day-Lewis and legions more right-on celebrities."The reason for their sudden popularity is twofold," Nightingale says. "Oil and gas have become very expensive, and wood is a carbon-neutral fuel. The stoves give out five times as much heat as a regular fireplace and heat a far bigger part of the house." The cost and installation of a decent stove can be as little as GBP1,000, but is likely to cost much more as most chimneys need to be lined. However, enthusiasts like Nightingale believe that that money is quickly recovered by cheaper fuel bills.Cast-iron wood-burning stoves have been popular on the Continent since the 18th century (although there were ceramic stoves as early as the 16th century). But it was in Scandinavia where, thanks to its swathes of forest, the logburners became as ingrained as a post-sauna birching or a brisk sm&#xF8;rgasb&#xF8;rd. Today it is still the Nordic stoves that are the most fashionable. Companies such as Jotul, the Volvo XC90 of stoves that has the gentle sound of burning, crackling wood on its website, and Dovre ("successfully combating Norwegian winters for 60 years"). In Britain, manufacturers include the excellent Esse company, Aarrow stoves and now Aga."A good stove has a good airtight box without any leaks, it successfully gets rid of the gases, but does not let the heat go up the chimney," says James Price, of Green Man Stoves, a young company that has opened a showroom in the Cotswolds this winter. "Nowadays there are some really good British manufacturers, and a top-ofthe-range model will last you a lifetime."And surprisingly, many of those buyers are from metropolitan areas. "We are selling a lot of stoves in London that are so efficient they can burn wood in a smokeless zone," Nightingale said."The stoves have clean lines and lovely proportions. I can't think of any reason why one would have an open fire in preference to a stove other than downright stubbornness."There are, however, stove deniers who claim that you need a great big pile of logs to feed one and a forest to supply the woodpile (you can't run a stove on a chair leg purloined from a skip). Most stoves will rarely burn unattended for more than four hours and fire-lighting becomes a nightmare.Furthermore, it was once claimed that Country Life magazine refused to feature any house with a woodburning stove because they were thought to be "common". Now, of course they are anything but- until of course the next "big thing" when I imagine their social standing will once again be that of a flat-pack shelf unit from Ikea.Esse stoves esse.com Aarrow stoves aarrowfires.com Jotul stoves jotul.com/en-gb/ wwwjotulukcom Aga Stoves www.aga-web.co.uk/111.htm Stoves Online www. stovesonline.co.uk Green Man Stoves greenmanstoves.co.uk' oil and gas are very expensive- and wood is carbon-neutral'