Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, October 30, 2010CENTURY OF DEVELOPMENTProfessor Stephen GlaisterA little more than a century ago the auto industry was at a crossroads. Various technologies were vying to dominate the future of motoring. In the end, oil won over electric and steam-powered vehicles.Fast forward 100 years or so and we are in a similar position, though this time the necessity to beat climate change is the mother of invention, rather than big business.As an independent motoring think tank, the RAC Foundation sees the "greening" of the automotive sector as probably the most important research topic. Which is why we are backing the Future Car Challenge.It is fitting we are working alongside two other organisations that carry the same illustrious initials and to whom we have historic links. Who better to run the Challenge than the Royal Automobile Club; a body inextricably linked with the development of personal travel? RAC Motoring Services have also been progressive enough to support and promote the new generation of eco-friendly vehicles. The company's participation should be reassuring, because drivers need to know not only that they can buy green vehicles but that they can then fuel and insure them and get them fixed should they break down.The especially encouraging aspect of the FCC is that most of the cars on display are not prototypes but real models that are already in the showrooms, or will be soon.By 2050 the Government must cut the UK's greenhouse gas emissions by 80 per cent - this is a legal requirement under the Climate Change Act. Progress has already been made and not at the expense of the freedom to travel we individually and collectively rely on.Over the past decade exhaust emissions of CO2 have been reduced by 20 per cent. How? Through the refinement of existing petrol and diesel engines. Vauxhall's ecoFLEX, VW's BlueMotion and Ford's ECOnetic are three of the technologies demonstrating this as manufacturers close in on and beat the magic 100g/km of CO2. Making cars lighter and smaller will also help reduce energy usage.Yet so great is the challenge that ultimately a sea change will be required in the way the cars we drive are powered. Which technology will become dominant is far from clear. Electric cars have taken an early lead but hydrogen vehicles and those using bio-fuels also have their fans. And who is to say solar-powered cars won't have a part to play? Before all this, hybrids will make an important contribution, combining two or more fuel technologies to achieve big savings in energy consumption. Indeed they already are. Witness the successful petrol/electric Toyota Prius.But "greening" the car fleet is no small feat and does not currently come cheap. There are 27 million cars registered in the UK. Of these you can count the ultra-low carbon models on the fingers of one hand; an exaggeration, perhaps, but it makes the point. Mass production should help bring down the cost to the consumer. So too will the GBP43 million the Government is setting aside next year to offer grants of up to GBP5,000 to those buying the most environmentally friendly cars.In 1896 pioneering motorists held the first emancipation run to mark the de-regulation of motoring. It was a milestone in the automotive annals. In so many respects the Future Car Challenge deserves similar recognition.See telegraph.co.uk/motoring for full reviews of many of the cars taking part in the RAC Future Car Challenge, as well as news and features on "green" motoring.