Telegraph (London, UK) Friday, August 20, 2010CLIMATE PROTESTERS SET UP CAMP OUTSIDE RBS HEAD OFFICEAuslan Cramb Scottish CorrespondentDOZENS of protesters set up camp outside the headquarters of the Royal Bank of Scotland yesterday to protest its alleged involvement in climate change.Activists at the "camp for climate action" said they were angry about the banking group's role in financing oil industry developments around the world.They began moving into fields overlooking the ultramodern building outside Edinburgh on Wednesday night, a day earlier than planned to "outfox the authorities".The location of the site was announced through a mass text message and more protesters are expected to arrive over the next few days.Ruth McTernan, a spokesman for the camp, said: "It's been a dramatic start to what's going to be a week full of workshops, sustainable living and direct action against RBS's crimes against the climate."We're in a beautiful location here at Gogarburn, surrounded by the woods. People should come down, have a cup of tea and check out what's going on for themselves."Activists have also declared a day of mass action against RBS on Monday.Robbie Gillett, of Stop the Expansion of Manchester Airport, added: "RBS is a climate criminal whose dirty investments have led to countless human rights abuses, devastation of land across the world, including mountains and forests, and deep drilling." Police arrested two people at the site at Gogarburn, on the outskirts of Edinburgh, but said they had a duty to "facilitate peaceful protest and allow for freedom of assembly".A spokesman for the bank said it provided support for businesses working across many industries and reflected the make-up of society and the economy.She added: "Just as society as a whole has to make a transition to renewable energy sources, so will banks like RBS."In fact in recent years RBS has been one of the most active banks in the world in providing funding for renewable energy projects so we are at the forefront of helping finance the transition."Therefore, while we understand the protesters' intent and publicity tactics, we clearly cannot agree with their decision to target RBS. We have offered to meet with the leaders of the protest, and although they have not accepted, this offer still stands."Our top priority is securing the safety of our staff and customers and we urge the protesters to make their point peacefully."The protesters have set up tents, marquees, eco-toilets and kitchens at the site.