Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, October 2, 2010I'M EXPLODING ABOUT CLIMATE CHANGE, ACTUALLYVicki WoodsLast week in Los Angeles the heatwave broke records at 113 degrees (I prefer Fahrenheit because the heights are dizzier). Unfortunately for me, I was there the week before, with a suitcase full of useless, flimsy things. Los Angeles has been experiencing "extreme" weather this summer; it has been raining, foggy, and chilly. One learns over the years not to talk about the weather to Americans ("You British. Always the weather."), but every time I got into a car this time, the drivers were bewailing "climate change".So you believe in it now? I asked one driver, who said actually, yes, he did believe in man-made climate change, as it happens. But that's not what caused LA's gloomy summer, nor the Russian heatwave, nor the Pakistani floods. Oh, really? "No, ma'am. I regularly drive a professor of climatology at UCLA, and he says that once in a while the Earth just judders a little during its regular rotation. It's a wobble. It'll right itself next year."Hmm. Is he a climate change denier, your prof? "No, ma'am. He's a believer." When I got home I search-engineered for "  Los Angeles" and plodded from link to link until I stumbled upon an energetically jolly, predominantly pink site called 10:10Global.org.uk. Clearly a campaigning site. I'd vaguely heard of a campaign called 10:10 and knew it was something to do with making organisations cut their carbon emissions. But I'd no idea whose campaign it was except that it was obviously someone bien-pensant and planet-friendly (Blue Peter? Ed Miliband?).There was a button called "Mini Movie", which I pressed, on the assumption that mini is quicker than maxi or regular. It was quick; also disturbing. It's called No Pressure, written by Richard Curtis and begins with a classful of sweet-faced schoolkids being asked by a totally lovely teacher what they are doing to reduce their carbon emissions. The bright-eyed child actors fling up their hands and tell Miss they're cycling to school instead of being driven, using low-energy light bulbs, blah-blah. Totally lovely teacher asks how many are signing up to the 10:10 campaign? And all but two sweethearts fling up their hands. "No pressure!" says the teacher, presses a button and blows the non-joiners to pieces. Class screams as prop blood and body parts rain down on them. It is disturbing.I'm not sure having Richard Curtis doing your ads is a good idea. He's rightly famed for romantic fiction (Bridget Jones's Diary, Love Actually, Notting Hill) and I never mind having my withers wrung by (a younger) Hugh Grant in the small hours. But I didn't like this ad a bit. There's a wooden bit of business by Ledley King and Peter Crouch about low-energy floodlights and people coming to Spurs matches, at which David Ginola looks puzzled and says he doesn't care about carbon emissions that much. BANG! Ha ha! Unfortunately, he is so realistically exploded that when his fictionalised foot thuds down, it can't help but call to mind human bombs, Tubes, trains and buses - for those of us who don't go to matches by bike.Is it the Government that wants me to cut my own carbon emissions by 10 per cent by October 2010? Which government, anyway? It was always global Gordo doing big thinks about planet-saving, but it seems to be all Cameron in the clips on the 10:10 website. Crisp, confident and cock-ofthe-walk, accompanied by a hangdog sidesman, name of Huhne, he sprays soundbites about what "my Ministers" are doing to cut carbon.Well, I'm not cutting mine. I don't emit much, anyway. We wear a lot of jumpers and we're constantly harvesting nature's bounty down my way - loads of teensy hazelnuts two steps from the village hall. Ten-yearold Beetle, OK? What does Richard Curtis drive? I hope the Government is not paying for this horrible website, because whenever "government" pays, it means I pay, and I object. Explosively.