Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, November 27, 2010THIS MAN'S CAR IS ELECTRIFYINGGeoffrey LeanShai Agassi won't be going to next week's diplomatic extravaganza in Cancun, Mexico. But he is almost certainly doing more to avert disastrous climate change than all the thousands of delegates, campaigners and hangers-on attempting, once again, to get international agreement on tackling it.The 42-year-old Israeli entrepreneur has set himself a modest goal: ending the burning of oil in the world's 700 million cars, which release a quarter of global carbon dioxide emissions, while slashing the cost of motoring. And astonishingly, his plans have a good chance of succeeding. If they do, they could turn him into transport's Bill Gates - and make his fledgling Silicon Valley firm (called, as could only happen in California, Better Place) the world's biggest business.An unrealistic dream? Some traditional car companies say so. But Agassi has raised $700 million in capital - including $125 million from HSBC - in the most difficult investment climate in decades. Renault-Nissan has committed to producing at least 100,000 of his electric cars, under the brand name "Fluence". And governments are fasttracking programmes to transform motoring.Israel will be first on the road next year, aiming to eliminate petrol pumps by 2020. Denmark will launch its programme just months later. Australia is not far behind, while the Chinese government has just announced that it is providing $15 billion in seed money to build a world-beating electric car industry.Agassi's secret, however, is more conceptual than technological: he will market cars like mobile phones. Just as consumers buy a number of minutes of call time, and receive a discounted handset, motorists will buy subscriptions based on the number of miles they drive, and get their electric car subsidised. The subscription gets them access to tens of thousands of charging points - including two personal ones, installed at their home and place of work - as well as a fully charged battery whenever their existing one goes flat.These batteries are at the heart of Agassi's breakthrough, for they get round the two major limitations of electric cars: cost and range. His company will retain ownership of the batteries (which cost some GBP7,600 each), slashing the price of the rest of the car. If a vehicle reaches the end of its 100-mile range on a long journey, motorists can pop into a special service station where the batteries will be replaced by robots in less time than it now takes to fill the tank.It's an exciting idea - and it all started when the entrepreneur, then shooting up the corporate ladder at the mammoth software company SAP, was asked, alongside other "young leaders" attending the 2005 World Economic Forum in Davos, to suggest a way of making the world a better place. He picked turning cars away from oil, not through government intervention, but by making them cheaper and more convenient without it.For the next year, working at nights and weekends, he studied the fashionable "solutions", biofuels and hydrogen, before plumping for electricity. After another year developing his concept, he presented it at a Brookings Institution seminar attended by Shimon Peres, Israel's president. Inspired, Peres told him that his country - which has an obvious strategic interest in weaning itself off oil - would put the idea on the road if he could win over a major car manufacturer and raise $200 million. Carlos Ghosn, the president and chief executive of Renault-Nissan, saw the opportunity and took the risk - and the money flowed in.The system has just been successfully tested with Tokyo taxis, which are almost continually on the go. Commercial operations are expected to start in Israel at the end of next year, and in Denmark in early 2012. Both are small countries, where journeys are short - but Australia thinks the idea will work along its east coast, where it plans to build a chain of battery-switching stations.Running on electricity, Agassi says, will be cheaper than using petrol, even in the US. Most of the difference will be used to subsidise the cars, to make them cheaper than traditional equivalents. He believes that the "tipping point will come when a new electric vehicle costs less than a threeyear-old petrol one. He expects the Chinese to achieve that by 2015, at which point the whole thing would go critical.Of course, the climate does not benefit from electric cars if the electricity comes from burning fossil fuels - but Agassi's plans suit renewables well, because they help to offset their intermittency. The cars would mostly recharge at night, when wind is often stronger but its electricity is unused. And the batteries could even be used to store power, sending some back to the grid when supplies are low.If it works, the potential is mindboggling. "I didn't start out to create the biggest company on earth," Agassi tells me. But he believes that his plan to help save the world might - as a byproduct - do just that.