Telegraph (London, UK) Monday, September 27, 2010WORLD'S POOR ARE OVERLOOKED VICTIMS OF THE FINANCIAL CRISISJonathan SibunThink of the three biggest issues facing British business today. You won't be short of options - how about these for starters? The economy, climate change and commodity prices.It's a list brimming with challenges, short and long-term. But it's not just a business list. It's also a rundown of the biggest challenges facing Oxfam, as disclosed in the charity's annual report this month.To many people, charity and business and the challenges facing the two are divorced. Not so, says Dame Barbara Stocking, Oxfam's chief executive."It's all interconnected," she says. "Some 50m people have been driven into poverty globally because of the financial crisis."Despite that, Stocking is fresh from unveiling the strongest results in Oxfam's 68-year history, with GBP318m raised from donors and shops in the year to March. And while the charity's work is focused on wiping out famine and poverty in the developing world, it is in developed countries where the solutions to many of those problems will be found.The effect of the financial crisis on the UK housing market, City banks and business borrowing is well known, but its role in the lives of the poor has largely been overlooked, an oversight that clearly irks the chatty, down-to-earth 59-year-old."It's incredibly frustrating. Poor people are closely connected to the trading world because so many of them are producers and traders," she says, before variously describing the effect on food prices of climate change, eating habits and commodity speculation."We're certainly worried about speculation," Stocking says, in the wake of huge rises in the price of grain, cotton and other commodities. "There need to be controls, but how on earth do you do that? For poor people it's not just the price, but the fluctuation that affects them. It's frightening."Following a week when Vince Cable, the Business Secretary, has lambasted bankers as "spivs and gamblers", will Stocking also be taking up the bank-bashing? "We're not chucking stones. We haven't been going after the capitalist system nor bankers in any major way, partly because in order to engage in that whole regulation question you have to be very thorough and Oxfam is very careful that it doesn't speak about what it doesn't know. That said, we are concerned about how the system works."With that in mind, Oxfam has been one of the leading backers of a Robin Hood tax - a levy on transactions by financial institutions, the proceeds of which would be used to combat climate change and poverty.The idea, first proposed by Gordon Brown, appears to have been given relatively short shrift by the Tories, although the Liberal Democrats, and perhaps more tellingly France and Spain, back the proposal.Recognising that any tax move would have to be unilateral, Stocking says: "Obama has said there has to be a system for bailing out the banks without the taxpayer simply paying. Clearly we'd agree with that, but we'd go further into ways to get money to fight climate change and poverty, given how what the banks do in those areas has affected poor people so badly."But is Oxfam campaigning on this in vain? There's a lot of scepticism about whether a Robin Hood tax will ever come about."Give it time, give it time," the mother of two says with a smile."Given the debate is raging in so many countries, it suggests there is a real chance of pushing something like this through. There is this idea of people getting very rich from speculation while causing problems elsewhere in the world - there should be some payback for that."Oxfam has been involved in catastrophes from the Haiti earthquake, to the conflict in Sri Lanka and flooding in Pakistan in recent times, helping 17m people in 62 countries last year alone, so Stocking has seen the effects of climate change up close.The former NHS executive admits that against that backdrop, the lack of political progress on the issue is "a big disappointment"."It's not going to go away - there's no choice here. As every year goes by, it gets more worrying," she says. "I have to be careful what I say here, but this year, in terms of humanitarian crises, is absolutely dramatic. I mustn't and I won't claim that any of those are directly climate change. All I know is that the volumes of things we're expected to do are increasing dramatically and research shows that the number of extreme weather events has doubled since the 1990s."The Oxfam chief is launching a campaign in April based on "food justice in a resource-constrained world", and she expects business to get behind her."It's clear that the private sector is realistic about climate change and knows there will have to be big changes ahead. But what companies want is the parameters - so, is it about a cap in trade, is it about carbon taxing? They want to know what to do."All of that campaigning will take funding. But Stocking says that is one of the positives of the UK recession."The British people continue to be extremely generous. Last year our regular givers increased the amount they gave. And it's not a trivial number, it's 450,000 supporters," she says. "Even in the big crises, people will say to me, 'where does the money come from?' I'll say about half of it comes from the British public and they're absolutely staggered. They're staggered that people care."The other 50pc comes from governments, agencies and other institutions, a funding source Stocking is more concerned about."We are worried about institutions cutting back - the other governments - but it just means we have to go out and try harder. Very early on we thought about how we could make sure the money held up, how we could diversify. I'm doing a lot of travelling to the Gulf now to get money in."The organisation - named after its base in Oxford - had tightened its belt ahead of the downturn in a bid to maintain its output, she says."We were already planning for it before Lehman Brothers went down. [In the shops] what we knew from history was that people buy from us in a recession but don't give to us," Stocking says, detailing the innovations her commercial team came up with to battle those trends, whether a clothes exchange at Marks & Spencer or a collection bin at J Sainsbury."But also we pruned early on - in a recession especially, donors want to know that as much money as possible is going out to poor countries - and administrative costs fell 16pc last year. We laid off 70 posts in Oxfam House. And we closed programmes in some countries."Balancing those commercial realities with keeping staff motivated at Oxfam is, Stocking admits, a fine balance."We have to do things as professionally as we can as far as the money is concerned, but on the other hand it is a very different organisation to manage. It's an organisation where people are there because they believe in the cause. So if there is any sign as a leader that you don't believe in the cause, you're done for."With Oxfam and its big three challenges, that would seem to be the least of Stocking's problems.