Telegraph (London, UK) Friday, September 17, 2010THE MEEK SEEM TO HAVE INHERITED WESTMINSTERAndrew Gimson Comons SketchATHLETES, it has been said, become almost interesting in the last lap, and perhaps the same is true of the Miliband brothers. Their race for the Labour leadership is said to have become quite exciting, with the younger brother sprinting into the lead as they approach the winning post.Yet when Ed Miliband appeared yesterday morning in the Chamber, he did not even look out of breath. Nor did he liven things up by wearing a yellow jersey, like the leader of the Tour de France. Mr Miliband was clad in a white shirt, a dark suit and a light purple tie: standard gear for running against his brother.Chris Huhne, the Secretary of State for Energy and Climate Change, observed that "we're not a very sunny country", which means that solar panels work twice as well in Arizona.We hoped this might be the cue for Mr Miliband to announce that if he becomes leader, his policy will be to make the country sunnier, though maybe not as sunny as Arizona.But Mr Miliband is a more cautious politician than he likes to pretend, and stuck to the conventional line that climate change is bad. He said he and Mr Huhne were "in agreement about the importance of renewables", but omitted to remind us that he himself counts as a renewable.Mr Huhne regretted that "renewables are more expensive at the moment than fossil fuels". Mr Miliband used to work for Gordon Brown, a man who turned out to be one of the fossil fuels of politics. But Mr Miliband has striven in recent years to transcend his Brownite past and go greener than green, or at least greener than Mr Brown.Mr Miliband accused Mr Huhne of a lack of enthusiasm, if not for saving the planet, then at least for getting the money to do so out of the Treasury. Mr Huhne said he was reminded by "the passion" of Mr Miliband's "oratory" that his adversary was trying to rustle up support in the Labour leadership race.It is true that Mr Miliband had a slight go at Mr Huhne, even telling him at one point: "I wasn't quite sure whether that was a yes or a no." But there was much more piety than passion in Mr Miliband's remarks.We waited in vain for anyone to say anything faintly passionate about energy security, fuel poverty or the transition to a low-carbon economy. The language was so earnest and managerial it was hard to imagine anyone who was not already a committed environmentalist getting in the slightest bit excited.Perhaps that is what is wrong with the Labour leadership contest: too much pious repetition of conventional views and not enough passion.At one point the Speaker, John Bercow, had to intervene to stop what sounded as if it was developing into a full-scale lecture by Mr Huhne on the state of the economy.The Speaker got through all 20 questions on the Order Paper. But even this admirable performance failed to produce a sense of momentum.