Telegraph (London, UK) Friday, June 4, 2010PACIFIC ISLANDS ARE RISING TO CHALLENGE OF GLOBAL WARMINGPaul Chapman in WellingtonLOW-LYING Pacific islands regarded as examples of the threat from rising sea levels caused by climate change are expanding not sinking, a study claims.Scientists are surprised by the findings, which show some islands have grown by almost a third over the past 60 years.Among the island chains to have increased in land area are Tuvalu and neighbouring Kiribati, both of which attracted attention at last year's Copenhagen climate summit.The researchers say the findings challenged accepted views on the effects of global warming.In the study, they compared aerial photographs and high-resolution satellite images of 27 islands taken since the 1950s. Only four, mostly uninhabited, had decreased in area despite local sea level rises of almost five inches, while 23 stayed the same or grew. Seven islands in Tuvalu grew, one by 30 per cent, although the study did not include the most populous island.In Kiribati, three of the most densely populated islands, Betio, Bairiki and Nanikai, also grew by 12.5 to 30 per cent.Prof Paul Kench, of Auckland University, who coauthored the study with Dr Arthur Webb, a Fiji-based expert on coastal processes, said the study challenged the view that the islands were sinking as a result of global warming."Eighty per cent of the islands we've looked at have either remained about the same or, in fact, got larger," Prof Kench told New Scientist magazine. "Some have got dramatically larger. The physical foundations of these islands will still be there in 100 years."He said the study suggested the islands had a natural ability to respond to rising seas by accumulating coral debris from the surrounding reefs."It has long been thought that as the sea level goes up, islands will sit there and drown. But they won't," Prof Kench said.The islands comprise mostly coral debris eroded from encircling reefs, which is pushed up on to the islands by wind and waves.Because coral is a living organism, it continues to grow, so the process becomes continuous. Land reclamation and deposition of other sediment also contribute to the process."These islands are so low lying that in extreme events waves crash over the top of them," Prof Kench said. "In doing that they transport sediment from the beach or adjacent reef and throw it on to the top of the island."But the two scientists said islanders still faced serious challenges from climate change, particularly if the pace of sea level rises were to overtake that of sediment build-up.The fresh groundwater that sustained villagers and their crops could be destroyed. "The land may be there but will they still be able to support human habitation?" Prof Kench said.