Telegraph (London, UK) Thursday, April 15, 2010CLIMATE SCIENTISTS WERE NAIVE BUT DIDN'T FIX FIGURESLouise Gray Environment CorrespondentCLIMATE change scientists at the centre of a row over manmade global warming were cleared of deliberately manipulating their figures yesterday, but accused of naivety over the leaked emails controversy.The University of East Anglia's Climatic Research Unit triggered an international row over climate change science after a series of emails between its scientists emerged, which appeared to cast doubt on their objectivity.In one of the emails, which were posted online, Prof Phil Jones, the head of the unit at the time, mentioned how he used a "trick" to "hide" data which did not appear to conform to global warming theory.In another, one of the scientists at the unit disclosed his opposition to agreeing to Freedom of Information requests about their climate change data, arguing that discussions with colleagues were "private".Climate sceptics leapt on the emails as evidence that the scientists were pursuing an agenda to prove that global warming was happening.An independent inquiry into the row yesterday concluded that there was no evidence of any "deliberate scientific malpractice" at the unit. But it criticised the experts for being "disorganised" and "naive".Lord Oxburgh, an academic and the former head of Shell who conducted the inquiry, reviewed 20 years of research. He said: "Whatever was said in the emails, the basic science seems to have been done honestly and fairly."Speaking of the scientists at the unit, he said: "We found a small group of dedicated if slightly disorganised researchers who were ill-prepared for being the focus of public attention."The email row cast a shadow over the United Nations' meeting in Copenhagen to try to agree a deal to stop global warming. The controversy spread when it emerged that the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change had allowed into its report unsubstantiated claims that the Himalayan glaciers would disappear by 2035.The latest inquiry into the behaviour of CRU scientists found that there was "absolutely no evidence of any impropriety whatsoever".Prof David Hand, a member of the review panel, said the scientists "did not use the most advanced statistical tools" but they had brought to light the uncertainties over the extent of global warming.The panel said any exaggeration of the extent of global warming was made by other organisations - including the IPCC, public bodies and governments - which took the data produced by academics but failed to inform the public about the uncertainties.Supporters of the researchers said the inquiry upheld the science behind global warming. Edward Acton, the vice-chancellor of UEA, said the report was a relief to the individuals involved and that the university's integrity remained "firmly intact".