Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, December 4, 2010WILL WE END UP WITH NO DEAL AT ALL?Geoffrey LeanIt was supposed to be The Empire Strikes Back summit - the middle episode of an epic trilogy, in which all the plot threads were carefully arranged ahead of a wham-bam finale. The climate conference taking place in this Mexican seaside resort was expected to be an unspectacular, workmanlike occasion, intended to repair some of the damage wrought by last year's dramatic, though disappointing, meeting of world leaders in Copenhagen and pave the way for a formal agreement on combating global warming in South Africa in a year's time.Instead, Cancun is coming to resemble the second Star Wars film in a rather different way: it, too, may have a humdinger of a cliffhanger ending. Indeed, there is a good chance that it will go careering over the edge at full tilt, not merely failing to make progress towards a new treaty, but actually sabotaging the only one that the world already has - and doing grave damage to the United Nations, and confidence in multilateral negotiations as a whole, in the process.Not that you would guess anything of the sort if you dropped in on the Moon Palace, the vast campus-style hotel where the talks are taking place. It looks more like a particularly laid-back academic conference, with bureaucrats who normally seem to be surgically attached to their suits ambling around in the sun in chinos and shirt sleeves: unusually, the organisers of the UN conference specified a casual dress code to help lighten the atmosphere.In the closed negotiating sessions in the boxily functional meeting rooms, the mood is equally relaxed and sunny. None of the many flashpoints that caused the Copenhagen conflagration have so far ignited, and the repeated procedural points deliberately raised in the Danish capital to bog things down have, as yet, been mercifully absent.The Mexicans are proving to be far better hosts than the disastrous Danes, winning the confidence of both industrialised and developing countries. And peace is also breaking out between the United States and China - the two carbon superpowers, together responsible for about half of the world's emissions - whose clash was at the root of the problems in Copenhagen. Both delegations are going public with warm words for each other; Su Wei, China's chief negotiator, even says that the differences between them on the most contentious issue of all - the American insistence on international monitoring of the domestic measures China takes to control emissions - are "not that huge". In general, he adds, "both countries would like to emerge from Cancun with a deal"."It is not eventful and that's very good," says the leader of one European delegation. "The fact that we are making slow progress is actually a great success at this stage of the proceedings." And yet, despite this rare outbreak of sweetness and light, everyone is aware that a grenade has been rolled under the door that could blow up and destroy everything.It comes from the unlikely hands of the Japanese, who normally go out of their way to avoid being contentious in international environmental negotiations (those involving whaling excepted). They pulled out the pin on the very first day of the meeting, announcing that they would not "on any conditions or under any circumstances" tolerate the renewal of the emission controls set by the existing Kyoto Protocol when they run out at the end of next year. Since no new treaty is conceivable by then, this would leave the world without any internationally agreed targets to combat global warming and probably destroy much of the emerging world carbon market.Hideki Minamikawa, the country's vice-minister for global environmental affairs, says that it does not make sense to rely on the protocol, which covers only 27 per cent of the world's emissions, since the US has refused to sign up and China and other developing countries are exempted.Technically, he is right. But politically, Japan's actions are explosive.Developing countries see extending controls under the protocol as the crucial litmus test of whether the industrialised nations are serious about tackling climate change - suspecting, with justice, that many would like to avoid any internationally agreed, legally binding targets at all. This suspicion was a major cause of the breakdown in Copenhagen and if not allayed, will doom the talks here, too.Britain and the rest of Europe also wanted to do away with the protocol in the past, but now accept that if there is to be any hope of international measures to combat climate change, Kyoto will have to continue, at least for the time being, alongside a separate agreement covering the US and developing countries.It is on their shoulders that the chances of averting disaster now rest - especially those of the Coalition, which has recently taken the lead in the EU. Chris Huhne, the Climate Change Secretary, who flies out today, determined to keep the talks on track, might care to pack a lightsabre.