Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, March 24, 2010CLIMATE CHANGE 'WILL SEE BANANA PLANTS TAKE OVER LAWNS'Louise Gray Environment CorrespondentTHE traditional English garden of green lawns surrounded by foxgloves and lupins could be wiped out by climate change, the National Trust has warned.The trust said temperature rise could result in gardens more like those in Portugal with date palms, olive trees and even banana plants by the end of the century.Water shortages will mean the end of immaculately mown lawns, while flooding and extreme weather could kill ancient trees.The Met Office has warned that if greenhouse gas emissions continue to increase, global temperatures could rise by 2C (3.6F), making southern England's climate similar to south-west France, while a 4C (7.2F) rise could expose gardens to conditions more like south-west Portugal.Paintings commissioned by the National Trust show what the temperature rise would do to a typical British garden. Even a 2C rise could see lawns drying out and moisture-loving perennials like delphiniums being replaced by hardy Mediterranean plants like rock rose, while wetter winters could threaten spring bulbs such as tulips and hyacinths.If the temperature goes up by 4C or more, the picture shows gravel replacing the lawn surrounded by citrus plants, passion flowers and cacti. Orchards would be replaced by nectarines, oranges and banana plants. On the nearby parkland, goats graze the pasture rather than cattle and cork or olive trees are seen instead of species such as beech or chestnut.Mike Calnan, of the National Trust, said people were aware of the impact of climate change on polar bears and ice caps but not on their gardens.He said: "The illustrations really help set out what the future might look like for a garden in southern England by the end of the century, if not before, if we do not tackle the carbon emissions issue."The paintings will be shown at National Trust gardens this summer. The touring exhibition, A Flower in Time, will display paper flowers made by Joe Swift, the presenter of Gardeners' World, and Alan Titchmarsh, the TV presenter and gardener, to publicise the risk of climate change.The National Trust is undertaking an inventory of plants at 80 of its gardens to see which ones are most under threat from   and propagating species which will survive better.4 The rise in degrees that will make England's climate similar to that of south-west Portugal