 MORE COMMENT ONLINE, Thursday, August 13, 2009 676 mots, p. 6

Engineering a cooler climate

Energy source : Bjørn Lomborg, the author of The Skeptical Environmentalist , now believes reaching an agreement at Copenhagen is vital. His Copenhagen Consensus has published a paper calling for consideration of geo-engineering measures such as deflecting sunlight from the surface of the earth. Mr Lomborg answers readers' questions below.

Jeremy Whipp : Don't you think that by placing too much emphasis on techniques such as geo-engineering, we risk relying too heavily on highly risky scientific endeavours (more risky for the environment, I would argue, than reducing carbon emissions) with climatic effects that we still understand relatively poorly? Bjørn Lomborg : You're quite right that there should be an informed, ethical discussion about climate engineering. And I should underline the point that last week's research paper - on the costs and benefits of different climate engineering solutions - is just one of a series that the Copenhagen Consensus Centre is releasing this month. In each paper, different climate economists look at the costs and benefits of different responses to global warming, whether it is cutting carbon, methane or black carbon, planting more forests, etc.

To answer your question: there are risks to be considered, but we shouldn't kid ourselves that other possible solutions to global warming - like the one we focus most on, carbon cuts - are risk-free. Think about what happened with bio-fuels - and think, also, about the possible impacts on free trade. Also consider the boondoggle that politicians are likely to make - the Waxman-Markey Bill was 1,400 pages long, gives pay-offs to everyone imaginable but does virtually nothing to actually reduce temperatures.

Nicolay Worren : Are there any new pieces of evidence available now that made you change your mind and which were not available when you wrote your earlier books? Or are you simply interpreting the same data differently? Do you believe that the analyses and recommendations of the United Nations climate panel adequately represent the consensus among leading climate researchers? BL : In both my first Danish book in 1998 and the English version of The Skeptical Environmentalist in 2001, I stressed that man-made global warming exists. In Cool It , I wrote: "Global warming is real and man-made. It will have a serious impact on humans and the environment toward the end of this century". What I have also consistently argued is that there are other global challenges that we must also address, and that some of the extreme suggestions about global warming are overblown. My view is that the careful research of the UN panel of climate change scientists, the IPCC, is the best guide to what we can expect from global warming. The IPCC's report-writing process is robust and custom-made to weather criticism.

Matthew Bates : Don't you fear that if "advanced industrialised" countries cannot develop a sustainable lifestyle we will not have the moral authority to co-operate with developing countries on these issues? BL : I think that one of the real problems we have, in terms of rich nations' "moral authority", is that there are so many problems prevalent in the developing world today that we could fix incredibly cheaply but which we do not engage with. Last year, the Copenhagen Consensus looked at 10 different major global challenges and investigated the costs and benefits of different solutions. The project highlighted how cheaply we could address problems such as malnutrition and goitre, or get clean drinking water to those that lack it.

In terms of global warming, our biggest challenge is ensuring that the entire world - and not just rich countries - can shift away from reliance on fossil fuels. I'm not convinced that a global deal on carbon mitigation is the best way to achieve that transformation.

Eric Toogood : Why do you think it is that no one seriously questions US policy on petrol taxation? Increasing the cost of petrol for Americans would force their society to use their petroleum resources more efficiently. Europeans do quite well, with petrol costing over €1 a litre. I cannot see that Mr Obama has mentioned an increased tax on petrol as an option for the US economy.

BL : This really shows how difficult and unpopular a narrow focus on carbon mitigation is. Consider how Al Gore, when he was vice-president, pushed so hard to institute a tax on energy that would have raised the cost of gasoline by 7.5 cents a gallon - but ended up casting the deciding vote to increase the federal gas tax by just 4.3 cents a gallon.

Nicholas Grealy : We've seen "unconventional" shale gas extraction techniques push up North American reserves, even beating coal on price sometimes. Could third-generation gas be the "bridge fuel" that some propose? BL : These technological breakthroughs are obviously really important. But to turn your question around: if we are using this as a "bridge fuel", what are we building a bridge to? If we are going to move away from reliance on carbon-based energy sources, we need to ensure that alternatives become cheap, effective and competitive. That's where I believe that a technology-led policy approach needs to be a bigger part of our thinking today. 