

Tuesday, January 14, 2014

Financial Times (FT.com) • 605 words

Compelling case for global deal on
climate, says UN

By Ed Crooks in New York



The need for international regulation to tackle the threat of climate change is "much more compelling" now than at the failed talks in Copenhagen in 2009 because of the mounting evidence of the effects of global warming, the UN' top climate official has said

Christiana Figueres, executive secretary of the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change, said she expected a draft agreement of less than 50 pages, including a goal of zero net greenhouse gas emissions by the second half of the century, to be ready for discussion at climate talks in Lima at the end of the year.

Speaking to the Financial Times in New York, she accepted it would be a "tall order" to transform the world's energy system to reach that goal, but said she expected advances in technology to make it possible.

Hopes of a global climate agreement face a critical two years, culminating in what is intended to be the decisive meeting in Paris in December 2015.

The last international push towards a deal collapsed at the Copenhagen talks, and recently some countries have moved to weaken their curbs on greenhouse gases.

Japan said in November that its shift away from nuclear power following the Fukushima disaster meant its emissions would rise by 3 per cent between 1990 and 2020, instead of falling 25 per cent as it had promised in 2009. In Australia the coalition government is pushing for repeal of the country's carbon tax.

In the EU, there is fierce debate over the cost of policies to boost renewable energy and cut emissions, while in the US, although President Barack Obama has launched regulatory moves to control greenhouse gases, there is no chance of climate legislation passing through Congress.

However, Ms Figueres argued that conditions were now more favourable for a global deal. About 30 countries or groups of countries - counting the EU as one - have climate legislation, and many more have targets. Even China has a carbon dioxide emissions market covering seven cities, and policies for improving energy efficiency and developing low-emissions power from nuclear and renewable sources.

"It's very difficult to have international regulation before you have enough national legislation," Ms Figueres said.

"It's [now] much more of a building process, where the process is to integrate national efforts out of national interests with the global effort out of global interests."

She also argues that evidence of widespread effects of climate change, from record temperatures in Australia to droughts in the US, will help push countries towards a deal, in spite of the apparent pause in global warming, with average temperatures roughly flat since 1998.

"True, there's not terribly much variation here [in the past decade]," she said.

"But the average of this decade is substantially higher than the previous decade, and that decade is substantially higher than [the one before]. So the direction of travel is very clear."

The new treaty is expected to be more flexible than the plans for limits on national greenhouse gas emissions that were proposed and rejected at Copenhagen. Countries will be able to offer a range of approaches, including emissions limits, reductions in the greenhouse gas intensity of their economies, and specific measures such as improvements in energy efficiency.

Previously, the UN jargon talked about countries' "commitments" to curbing emissions; now they are called "contributions", in an attempt to reassure governments that they will not be asked to make promises that they cannot keep. This less rigid approach, however, has problems of its own.

"There will be a major gap between the sum total of their contributions and where we have to be in the second half of the century," Ms Figueres said.

"That's the gap that we need to think very creatively around. How do we best optimise technology, finance, policy, to be able to fill in that gap in a manner that is feasible for corporations and countries?"

As Ms Figueres acknowledges, the transformation of the world's energy sector that will be needed to achieve the emissions cuts she is talking about, including reduced reliance on oil and gas, and "very little" coal, is a daunting challenge. But she argues that technology will make it possible.

"Look at the advances in the telecommunications industry over the past 30 years . . . That is the kind of technological advance we will see in energy," she said.

"If you had told me when I was in college that I would have a little thing that could do 1,000 times more than a mainframe computer, I would have laughed my head off. But that is the kind of revolution that has to occur - and will occur - in the energy sector."
