  Wednesday, January 22, 2014  Financial Times (FT.com) • 508 words 
 EU sets out new climate change goals 
 By Christian Oliver in Brussels and Pilita Clark in London 

 Brussels has taken a step back  from the ambitious environmental agenda that made the EU a global green leader with a new set of energy targets that emphasise the need for economic growth and industrial competitiveness.  A keenly anticipated climate and energy blueprint unveiled on Wednesday requires member states to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions by 40 per cent from 1990 levels by 2030, extending an existing goal to cut emissions 20 per cent by 2020.  The new target is relatively stringent compared with other developed countries.  in a victory for  However, industry groups and countries such as the UK, the 2030 targets do not include another mandatory goal to increase the amount of energy EU countries generate from renewable sources such as wind power and solar plants.  Nor do they spell out how to boost energy efficiency.  Instead, the package unveiled by the European Commission proposes a goal to produce 27 per cent of energy from renewables by 2030, but says it will be up to individual countries to decide how to meet it.  This was a recognition that renewables were no longer a "small baby in the pram", said one senior commission official, but had now grown to be "a fully fledged teenager".  The 2030 package, which builds on current 2020 targets launched seven years ago, also in effect gives the green light for shale exploration throughout the region.  And it includes a series of studies and papers that address industry complaints that the 2020 targets launched before the eurozone crisis and global recession undermined EU competitiveness by making energy too costly.  These included a report showing how high EU industrial electricity prices were compared with trading partners such as the US and China, and a paper calling for a "European industrial renaissance".     Commission officials said this was in line with a need to "mainstream competitiveness" throughout the bloc.  "The 2030 framework sets a high level of ambition for action against climate change, but it also recognises that this   needs to be achieved at least cost," said EU energy commissioner, Günther Oettinger.  another binding renewables target while Germany, which is shutting down its nuclear reactors, had lobbied for binding targets.  Environmental groups say the 40 per cent emissions reduction target is still going to be too low to stop global temperatures rising to potentially dangerous levels.   The targets drew immediate scorn from renewable energy groups and green campaigners who said the commission was lowering its environmental ambitions.  "The previously far-sighted and ambitious European Commission is a shadow of its former self, hiding behind the UK and other backward-looking member states and lobbies," said the chief executive of the European Wind Energy Association, Thomas Becker.  However, some business groups said they were pleased with the turnround.  "It is positive that the pack of measures published today acknowledges the challenge of high energy prices in the EU and addresses the risk of investment leakage better than in the past," said Markus J Beyrer, director-general of BusinessEurope. Connie Hedegaard, the climate commissioner, rejected the idea that Europe's desire to lead in green energy was holding the EU back against US and Asian competitors, noting renewables had already created 1.2m jobs in Europe and stood to create 3m by 2020.  "How many sectors do we have in Europe that contribute so much to job creation?" she asked. "It is a strategic question for Europe: do we want to leave these expanding markets energy efficiency and renewables to the Chinese, South Koreans and others?"  Britain, which is expanding its nuclear power stations and looking to develop shale reserves, had fought hard against     