The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, April 1, 2014, p. 2Act on Climate change, demands USBy Sarah Knapton and Danielle Demetriou in YokohamaCLIMATE change is jeopardising our way of life in the West and the cost of inaction will be "catastrophic", John Kerry, the US secretary of state warned yesterday.In the strongest indication yet that the US is fully committed to tacking manmade global warming, Mr Kerry claimed that any "denial of the science" would be "malpractice".He was responding to a major report by the United Nations which described the impacts of global warming as "severe, pervasive and irreversible". The study from the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) stated that many impacts of rising temperatures were already being felt and warned of increasing floods, droughts, threats to food security, increased conflict and economic losses.In a statement, Mr Kerry said: "Unless we act dramatically and quickly, science tells us our climate and our way of life are literally in jeopardy. Denial of the science is malpractice. There are those who say we can't afford to act. But waiting is truly unaffordable. The costs of inaction are catastrophic."One of the report authors, Prof Neil Adger, of Exeter University, warned that global warming will fuel a surge in British "- refugees", including families forced out of their homes due to flooding, as well as increasing fatalities due to extreme heatwaves. "The impacts of climate change are already here and they're being felt everywhere in the world," he said. "There's no country, no region that's actually immune from climate change."Professor Adger's comments were made as the UK emerged from its wettest winter on record, resulting in 7,000 homes across the country flooded, 11 deaths and a cost to small businesses of around £830 million.He was speaking in Yokohama, Japan, where the comprehensive IPCC Working Group II report examining the impact of global warming was published yesterday, compiled by more than 300 authors from 70 different countries."The records already show that there's been an increase in precipitation," said Professor Adger. "Rainfall is coming in shorter periods so we have an increase in rainfall intensity. That's what leads to increased risk of flooding."The biggest single movement of people in the world is still into cities," he added. "These cities are growing – and that's where the crucible of impacts is going to be felt."William Hague, the Foreign Secretary, said: "It is clear from the IPCC's report that a two–degree increase in the world's temperature would be dangerous, and four degrees would be catastrophic. But that is the likely trajectory, unless there is unprecedented global cooperation. No country would be left unaffected. Governments everywhere have to act."The latest IPCC report, the first update in seven years, confirms that climate scientists appear more certain than ever before that human behaviour is the key culprit for global warming.Declaring the warming trend "unequivocal", it highlights how temperatures could rise as much as 4.8C by the end of the century – with a minimum increase of around 0.3C if governments succeed in sharply cutting greenhouse emission rates.