The New York Times Late Edition - FinalForeign, Tuesday, April 1, 2014, p. A 3NEWS ANALYSISClimate Study Puts Diplomatic Pressure on ObamaBy CORAL DAVENPORTWASHINGTON -- A sweeping new study on the effects of climate change -- which the report says is already disrupting the lives and livelihoods of the poorest people across the planet -- creates a diplomatic challenge for President Obama, who hopes to make action on both climate change and economic inequality hallmarks of his legacy.The report, published this week by the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, concludes that the world's poorest people will suffer the most as temperatures rise, with many of them already contending with food and water shortages, higher rates of disease and premature death, and the violent conflicts that result from those problems.Countries like Bangladesh and several in sub-Saharan Africa that are the most vulnerable to the effects of climate change say the report strengthens their demand for "climate justice" -- in other words, money, and plenty of it -- from the world's richest economies and corporations, which they blame for the problem.Those countries and nongovernmental organizations point to a 2009 pledge by Secretary of State Hillary Rodham Clinton to create a $100 billion annual climate fund for poor countries by 2020. The World Bank justified such an expenditure in a 2010 report concluding that it would take up to $100 billion a year to offset the ravages of climate change on poor countries.Climate policy experts say that the United States, as the world's largest economy, would be expected to provide $20 billion to $30 billion of that annual fund.That puts Mr. Obama and Secretary of State John Kerry, who has been working aggressively behind the scenes to forge a United Nations climate change treaty in 2015, in a tough position.But both men know there is no chance that a Congress focused on cutting domestic spending and jump-starting the economy will enact legislation agreeing to a huge increase in so-called climate aid. Since 2010, the Obama administration has spent about $2.5 billion a year to help foreign countries adapt to climate change and adopt low-carbon energy technology.It will be a stretch even to continue that level of spending. Many Republicans, who control the House and have a chance to gain the Senate this fall, question whether climate change is real."If the White House actually wants something like this, it should begin by building support among congressional Democrats, but -- at this point -- I don't see any real signs of support from House or Senate Democratic leaders at all," said Michael Steel, a spokesman for Speaker John A. Boehner of Ohio.Vulnerable nations, emboldened by the new United Nations report, are demanding more, not less, from the United States.Ronald Jean Jumeau, the United Nations ambassador from the island nation of Seychelles, and a spokesman for the Alliance of Small Island States, compared the proposed fund with the amount of money Congress approved after Hurricane Sandy."We know that $100 billion is not going to be enough," Mr. Jumeau said. "After Sandy, Congress voted for $60 billion in recovery for New York, New Jersey and Connecticut -- for one storm. It shows you how much $100 billion is going to cover.""The science is getting better, and it tells us things are getting worse for us," he added. "And the money is not coming."The window is starting to close on Mr. Obama's ability to broker a treaty that could significantly reduce greenhouse gas pollution in time to avoid the most disastrous effects of climate change. This fall, at the United Nations General Assembly, world leaders will meet to put offers on the table for a climate change pact, a mix of commitments to cut fossil fuel pollution at home and provide money to poor countries to adapt. A few months later, at a two-week summit meeting in Lima, Peru, they will negotiate a draft of a final treaty that is set to be signed next year in Paris and take effect in 2020.Diplomats say the new report has increased pressure on governments to reach a climate deal."By underscoring impacts and vulnerabilities, the report makes clear the urgency for strong action to reduce emissions and build greater resilience," said Todd D. Stern, the State Department's chief climate change negotiator.In a speech in London last fall, Mr. Stern made clear that there was no chance that the United States would finance most of any climate adaptation fund with taxpayer dollars. "The fiscal reality of the United States and other developed countries is not going to allow it," he said. Mr. Stern and others say the bulk of that money will have to come from private investors and corporations.Nongovernmental organizations say that relying chiefly on the private sector will not be enough, especially as food supplies grow short. "The scientists could not have been more clear, particularly in the area of food security," said Timothy Gore, an analyst for Oxfam, the antipoverty group. "There is no government that's going to be able to stick around very long if the price of bread keeps going up, if they can't feed their people.""I challenge anyone in the U.S. government to explain how the private sector is going to invest in what's needed on the ground, like funding farmers in the Sahel region facing crop loss from changing rainfall patterns," Mr. Gore said, referring to the area of Africa just south of the Sahara.Hanging over the coming negotiations will be the specter of the failed 1997 Kyoto Protocol. Vice President Al Gore promised in those talks that the United States would act on climate change, only to have the Senate refuse to ratify that treaty. At a 2009 climate summit meeting in Copenhagen, Mr. Obama promised that Congress would soon pass a sweeping climate change bill. Just months later, the bill died in the Senate.Mr. Obama is now trying to bolster his credibility on the issue by flexing his executive authority and acting without Congress. His administration is moving ahead with aggressive new Environmental Protection Agency regulations to reduce carbon pollution from coal-fired power plants. At talks around the world, Mr. Kerry and Mr. Stern have sought to persuade other nations that, this time, the United States will be able to keep its commitments, since they do not require action from Congress.The United States' inability to offer more substantial aid to countries that did little to cause global warming will probably remain a major sticking point with developing nations, including India and China.Still, Connie Hedegaard, the European Union commissioner for climate action, said she hoped that could eventually be overcome: "I think the $100 billion mark can be reached. It was understood in Copenhagen that it had to be a mix of public and private money. I think vulnerable groups -- families in Bangladesh or the Philippines -- don't care whether a dollar coming their way is public or private."