 Monday, August 24, 2009 262 mots

Climate activists target London institutions
By Jim Pickard, Political Correspondent

The Bank of England, the Treasury, Heathrow and energy companies including Shell and Eon will be among the targets for up to 3,000 climate activists who will descend on London on Wednesday.

The protesters are set to form their week-long annual "Climate Camp" - complete with shops, lavatories and daily events - at an undisclosed location somewhere within the London area.

From there, they intend to carry out protests at a series of targets across the capital.

The full list of 22 locations on the demonstrators' list include the business department, transport department, stock exchange, London City airport, British Sugar, Rio Tinto, Unilever and BAA.

"One of the main aims of the Climate Camp is to take direct action against the root causes of climate change," said a spokesman for the movement.

"The City of London represents the epicentre of a failed economic system whose obsession with endless growth makes it impossible for us to move forward and deal with climate change."

The organisers said they would protest against issues ranging from the expansion of Heathrow airport to plans for new coal-fired power stations.

The Metropolitan police are under pressure ahead of the event after criticism of their handling of G20 protests earlier this year, where one bystander died.

Climate Camp organisers have urged the police to "stay as far away from it as possible".

A Met official said police were expecting to have to deal with between 1,000 and 1,500 activists - fewer than half the figure suggested by the event organisers.

He said there was no expectation of disorder from the protesters because most were "passionate about a cause".

However, the Met still expects to have 500 officers policing Climate Camp on any given day. It has called in police from elsewhere in the UK because it will also have to provide a strong presence at the Notting Hill Carnival this coming weekend.
