 FT REPORT - FUND MANAGEMENT, Monday, November 30, 2009 652 mots, p. 6

Include climate in long China view
By Pauline Skypala

Wondering what to write about for this column, I made a list of the week's news and events that could be of interest. It was quite a long one, what with the publication of the Walker Review and of findings from the investment consultation by the Personal Accounts Delivery Authority , dislocation in Dubai , and developments on the proposed European regulations for alternative investment funds.

But possibly the most significant item was the intriguing revelation that Anthony Bolton is to return to managing money , but is moving to Hong Kong to focus on China.

Mr Bolton, who stepped down as manager of Fidelity International's Special Situations fund in December 2007 after 28 years, is so excited by the investment opportunities in China he has torn up his retirement plans to return to the fray.

He is held in high regard by investors and notably called the bottom of the credit crash, in stock market terms at least, in March, although he had made a similar call in October before Lehman Brothers went bust. His long-term performance record puts him in the super-manager league, his fund's annual growth rate of 19.5 per cent during his tenure being well ahead of the 13.5 per cent annual gain by the FTSE All Share index over the same 28 years.

Of course, being a value manager, he had periods in the doldrums, but investors who stayed with him through the mania of the dotcom boom rather than switching to one of the go-go technology funds that mushroomed in the late 1990s did well in the end.

Can they hope to do as well in his new China fund, to be launched in March? Perhaps, if they have the stomach for the volatility they are likely to experience.

But Fidelity may decide not to offer the fund to the general investing public, or to put a relatively high minimum investment on it. A specialist China fund is still pretty exotic after all.

For my money, I would much rather Mr Bolton had decided that climate change was the big opportunity, and put his expertise to work in that area.

Perhaps he is a climate sceptic - I have no idea. Maybe China will be the best place to make money in the coming years. It may even be the best place to make money from climate change opportunities.

Perhaps too, the climate change fund area is just too fashionable for him. He is a contrarian investor by reputation after all, although China is hardly an unfashionable choice of focus.

What we need from the people, like Mr Bolton, making important capital allocation decisions is a longer term view of the world than most take, and a proper consideration of the risks and opportunities involved in the adaptation to and mitigation of climate change.

According to Stephen Green, chairman of HSBC: "The greatest single opportunity for markets to prove their worth will be in the fight against climate change."

Much of the effort will have to be made by asset owners. They have the money. Some have been active for years, but, as in the related area of corporate governance, there are a few making the effort and many reaping the benefit.

One of the questions raised at a briefing last week by Tomorrow's Company on effective stewardship by asset owners was about the market failure that deprives start-up businesses of capital to develop. One tenth of 1 per cent of the global capital pool goes to early stage capital, according to Steve Podmore, founder of the Global Sustainability Challenge. This harms investment returns and the ability to deal urgently with climate change, he said. "We need to revisit how we use capital to stimulate and drive innovation."

No one had any answers to that.

Politicians will gather in Copenhagen next month to talk about climate change. Their inability so far to deliver regulation that gives businesses a framework to work in has delayed progress and resulted in a failure to set a price for carbon that encourages the development of alternative energy sources.

The Copenhagen talks will not move matters on substantively, and much will continue to be left to markets. But if investors remain fixated on maximising short term returns, capital will not necessarily flow to companies making the necessary investment to adapt to climate change, or help mitigate it. And they could suffer losses if they have not taken account of longer term risks arising from climate change issues.

So it is good to see pension funds like Railpen trying to move the debate on, and raise important questions about fiduciary duty (see page 1), with the help of HSBC and Linklaters. Railpen will not necessarily make mandate decisions on the basis of the answers it gets to its lengthy questionnaire, but hopes nonetheless to influence fund managers.

A regulatory push to make reporting mandatory would help to raise awareness. A China fund taking a long-term view of the risks and rewards related to climate change run by Mr Bolton would be even better.

