 Friday, October 30, 2009 466 mots

EU proposes climate change funding deal
By Tony Barber in Brussels

The European Union proposed on Friday that rich countries should transfer up to €50bn a year by 2020 to help developing countries fight climate change, but stopped short of stating how much the EU was willing to contribute.

Leaders of the 27-nation bloc agreed that the EU's less well-off member-states in central and eastern Europe should pay less than rich countries in western Europe, but did not reach a deal on how to split the costs.

Speaking after a two-day summit in Brussels, where climate change funding proved the most contentious issue, EU leaders put a brave face on an outcome that failed to set out a detailed European negotiating position for December's global climate change conference in Copenhagen.

"We can now look the rest of the world in the eye and say, 'We Europeans have done our job. We're ready for Copenhagen,'" said José Manuel Barroso, European Commission president.

However, he acknowledged that the question of central and eastern European financial contributions to an international fund for developing countries remained open. "This matter has to be decided fully after a successful outcome at Copenhagen," Mr Barroso told reporters.

Nine countries, led by Poland, dug their heels in at the summit, demanding that the western Europeans lighten the financial burden on the EU's former communist states.

"We don't want a situation where Romania or Bulgaria is going to pay Brazil to mitigate carbon dioxide emissions, because it's absurd," said Mikolaj Dowgielewicz, Poland's EU affairs minister.

The tabular content relating to this article is not available to view. Apologies in advance for the inconvenience caused.

Fredrik Reinfeldt, prime minister of Sweden, which holds the EU's rotating presidency, said he and his fellow leaders had agreed that developing countries would need an annual €100bn by 2020 to reduce their greenhouse gas emissions.

Developing countries themselves and an expanded world carbon market would provide at least half this amount, but rich nations ought to provide €22bn-€50bn in "international public support", the EU leaders agreed. They said the EU was willing to provide "its fair share", but did not name a precise sum.

They also agreed that the developing world would need €5bn-€7bn a year from 2010 to 2012 in so-called "fast-start" financing, Mr Reinfeldt said. In a victory for the central and eastern European countries, the leaders agreed that EU governments would be free to contribute to the fast-start funds on a voluntary basis.

Reflecting arguments presented at the summit by Angela Merkel, Germany's chancellor, Mr Reinfeldt and Mr Barroso emphasised that the EU offer of financial help was conditional upon similar gestures from the US and other rich countries such as Japan, Australia and Canada.

"Our offers are not a blank cheque," Mr Barroso said.

He predicted that climate change financing would figure prominently in discussions that the EU leadership will hold in Washington on Tuesday with Barack Obama, the US president, and in New Delhi on Friday with Manmohan Singh, India's prime minister.

All the financial aid figures endorsed by EU leaders at the summit came from a Commission proposal first made public in September.

Some governments wanted the EU to suggest a more precise figure for international aid to developing countries than €22bn-€50bn, arguing that such a huge range made the proposal unconvincing.

However, the insistence of Poland and its allies that the EU should first establish the financial obligations of each member-state prevented an agreement.
