

The New York Times (web site)
Friday, March 26, 2021 -  429 mots

A climate scientist’s new job at NASA shows how the Biden
administration is elevating climate issues.

By John Schwartz

Gavin Schmidt, a leading climate scientist, was recently named to a newly created position as senior climate
adviser to NASA. Now he faces the challenge of bringing NASA’s climate science to the public and helping
ﬁgure out how to apply it to saving the planet.

Dr. Schmidt, who had headed NASA’s Goddard Institute for Space Studies since 2014, will be working with an
administration   that   is   making   climate   policy   one   of   its   priorities.   The   Biden   team   is   adding   positions
throughout the government for policymakers and experts like Dr. Schmidt who understand the threats
facing the planet.

“Climate change is not only an environmental issue that belongs to the E.P.A., it’s not only a science issue
that   belongs   to   NASA   and   NOAA,”   said   Katharine   Hayhoe,   a   climate   scientist   at   Texas   Tech   University.
“Climate change is an everything issue,” she said, and “it needs to be considered by every single federal
agency.”

Dr. Schmidt has written some 150 scientiﬁc papers, and has an active and sometimes acerbic social media
presence. At the Goddard Institute, he led development of one of the most authoritative models of Earth’s
climate system.

“Climate change changes what you need to worry about,” he said, and the space agency can help the nation,
and the world, ﬁgure out what we all need to know. That includes things like “How do we accelerate the
information   that   you   need   to   build   better   defenses   against   coastal   ﬂooding?”   and   “What   do   we   really
understand about intensifying precipitation?”

In announcing Dr. Schmidt’s appointment, the acting NASA administrator, Steve Jurczyk, said, “This position
will provide NASA leadership critical insights and recommendations for the agency’s full spectrum of science,
technology   and   infrastructure   programs   related   to   climate,”   though   the   position   will   have   no   separate
budget or staff.

The space agency, which launches the satellites that monitor the conditions of the Earth’s atmosphere,
oceans, snow, ice and more, is one of the wellsprings of hard science that inform us all about climate change.
But its leaders have sometimes had a difﬁcult time talking about it.

“Not   every   administration   was   interested   in   calling   it   ‘climate change,’   the   Trump   administration   most
notably,” said Lori Garver, a former NASA deputy administrator who is now chief executive of Earthrise, a
nonproﬁt that promotes using satellite data to address global warming.

Ms. Garver said she was “thrilled” by Dr. Schmidt’s appointment, calling it a message that “this will be a top
priority for NASA.”




 


