 The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Thursday, December 17, 2020 650 mots, p. 12

Scotland to 'phase out' petrol and diesel cars

Target for next 10 years laid out in climate change plan, amid concerns expensive targets will hurt poorest
By Georgina Hayes

THE sale of new petrol and diesel cars in Scotland is to be "phased out" in the next 10 years, prompting concerns over the affordability of government plans to fight climate change for ordinary Scots.

Scottish ministers published a 255- page Climate Change Plan yesterday, setting out more details of how they aim to achieve targets set by an earlier programme in 2018. Among the targets include a commitment to cutting the distance travelled in car journeys by a fifth by 2030 alongside more than 100 other policies to help Scotland reach its emissions reduction targets.

With a goal of reaching "net-zero" by 2045, other announcements in the "world-leading" aspiration to tackle climate change include £180million in funding for carbon capture and hydrogen technologies. It also includes £120million towards zero-emission buses and £50million for "active freeways" along major travel routes.

However, while the plan acknowl edges that persuading Scots to use their cars less often will require a national effort with better digital connectivity and more flexible and remote working needed to cut commuting, concerns have been raised over how to make the plan affordable for ordinary people.

"There are serious amounts of money committed here, and you've got to spend the money in the right way and have a plan," said Professor Karen Turner, director of Strathclyde University's Centre for Energy Policy.

"We need to make sure that we can deliver net zero in a way that doesn't disproportionately affect people on low-income jobs," she told The Daily Telegraph. "I'm concerned about how we keep the economy going and narrow some of those inequalities."

Prof Turner said that while climate change policy has often been domi nated by finding "the right technological solutions", the plan is also a "societal transition about how people live and work", which affects ordinary people "beyond reaching targets".

"It's difficult to achieve these things if you don't have affordable options for them," she added.

For example, public transport infrastructure must first be up to scratch if people are to reduce the number of miles travelled in cars, she said.

"In the Central Belt we have lots of choices but it's quite expensive, and people living in more rural communities might not have an awful lot of options," said Prof Turner, adding that people may also have "range anxiety" about electric cars. Moving away from petrol and diesel cars to electric can be expensive and if people can't afford a new vehicle then that "runs the risk of boosting the secondhand market".

Prof Turner also warned an "affordable alternative" to current heating systems is needed now to achieve the targets, as the most cost-effective option is still to buy another gas boiler.

"Heating is a really big challenge we face," she said. "It's all very well to offer a subsidy, but if you subsidise someone to put in a new system that doesn't help them with their bills.

"There's so much attention at the moment on both government spending to do the upfront spend part, but the solution involves increased costs. That could end up being a bigger problem than the upfront cost." Announcing the new blueprint, Climate Change Secretary Roseanna Cunningham said Scotland's targets were "rightly ambitious and extremely stretching".

She added: "We will need to be innovative, to learn as we are going and to utilise new and exciting technologies and ideas, seizing on the multiple benefits our journey to net-zero presents."

However, while ambitious, the plan has been criticised by campaigners as falling short of the action necessary to tackle climate change quickly.

Jess Cowell of Friends of the Earth Scotland said: "While there are welcome policy improvements, unfortunately there are very real doubts that this plan as a whole will actually deliver on these commitments."
