

Friday, December 18, 2015

Financial Times • London Ed1 • p. 3 • 510 words

Business hits at cuts in green
energy subsidies after Paris

Climate change

By Pilita Clark, Environment Correspondent



Ministers unveiled a string of subsidy cuts for rooftop solar and other green energy systems yesterday, five days after hailing a climate change accord sealed in Paris aimed at bolstering such technologies.

Support for household solar systems and small wind turbines will be as much as 65 per cent lower than current rates under new tariffs taking effect from February 8. The industry said this would be likely to cause the loss of thousands of jobs.

The cuts are not as steep as those the energy department proposed in August , which would have seen the amount of money paid to households for generating their own solar power cut by up to 87 per cent . But companies said the reductions in support were still a big blow for the industry.

The Conservative government has argued since its election in May that renewable subsidies, which are paid for through household and business energy bills, are likely to become too costly if they are not reined in and the energy department estimates the cuts in support announced yesterday will shave additional costs by £500m to £600m.

"The measures are a slight improvement on the original proposals but still mean that installing solar panels will no longer be attractive to British homeowners," said Juliet Davenport, chief executive of the Good Energy power utility.

The reductions in so-called feed-in tariffs, and confirmation that another subsidy system called the renewables obligation would close for many solar power systems, "suggest that Paris has changed nothing", said Seb Berry, head of public affairs at the Solarcentury company. "The increase in generation tariffs for smaller solar photovoltaic installations compared to the ridiculous numbers in the original consultation are welcome," he said.

But caps on the amount of installations that could be carried out mean "this is now a scheme for the few rather than the many", he added.

Amber Rudd, energy and climate change secretary, said she was determined to ensure subsidies were a temporary rather than permanent practice.

"My priority is to ensure energy bills for hardworking families and businesses are kept as low as possible while ensuring there is a sensible level of support for low carbon technologies that represent value for money," she said.

Ms Rudd played an active role in the talks that led to the Paris climate deal, which aims to encourage all countries to lower their dependence on fossil fuels.

After the accord was finalised, she said: "This deal will ensure all countries are held to account for their climate commitments and gives a clear signal to business to invest in the low carbon transition."

But the Renewable Energy Association was one of several green power trade bodies that said the new tariffs still fell short of delivering the robust support needed if the UK was to live up to the rhetoric it used in Paris. "While the changes will help save some in the industry, it remains [the case] that many will be exiting," said James Court of the REA.
