USA Today Thursday, May 4, 2017 - 21:00 UTC -0400Another day, another march. Then what?By Josh Rivera, USA TODAYLiving here, I see national landmarks so often that I'm annoyed when people ask me to take them to the Lincoln Memorial. It also desensitizes me to every march, protest or strike of the day. Two weeks ago it was the March for Science, last week it was The Great March for Climate Change, and this weekend it will be The Immigrants' March.But a strike in my hometown of San Juan, Puerto Rico, on Monday did hit this cynical Washingtonian. After Puerto Rico's debt ballooned to a point of no return, the island's finances were handed over to an oversight board created by Congress last year. Much like the case with President Trump in the mainland, recommendations, changes and appointments are starting to have an impact on the island's economy and its people's bottom line.Although I repudiate the violence that took place at the march in Puerto Rico's financial district, it's understandable -- not to mention convenient for those who wanted to undermine the protest.Therein lies the problem. Marches are a frail tactic to raise awareness. A broken window or tear gas thrown and the message loses all meaning.Take the Women's March here. There's no beating more than 2 million attendees. But what did it accomplish other than show discontent? Do marches produce tangible results anymore? Some might still believe that. The March for Science on April 22 is credited for a $2 billion boost for medical research at the National Institutes of Health. But let's be honest, the march would have been little more than a nice gesture had people not testified before Congress, or run campaign ads directed at lawmakers.I went to a liberal college in Rio Piedras, and we were known as the "strikers." During my four years, none of the almost yearly strikes stopped tuition hikes or funding cuts. At a student assembly when they were voting for yet another strike, I spoke up: "What's the point? We're known for doing strikes. From an outside perspective, this just looks like a bunch of whining college kids."And that still holds true. One more protest in Puerto Rico or Washington is the equivalent of Cher announcing another last tour. March, by all means, but civic engagement, more specifically grassroots lobbying, is the most powerful tactic citizens have. As someone who reads emails and letters from readers every day, I can assure you: If I receive more than three comments on the same issue, I'm paying attention.Why do you think the One Million Moms group can get TV shows to drop sponsors they deem inappropriate or get them canceled altogether? Because their efforts don't end with a march, they start with one. From there you create contacts, build coalitions and activate people.I'm not suggesting ridiculous protests like threatening a boycott because the Disney channel aired a gay kiss. How about trying to prevent the reauthorization of the Export-Import Bank, or pushing for an audit of Puerto Rico's debt? There's so much that's important -- and can't get done with just a march.