

Financial Times (web site)
Monday, March 8, 2021 - Z 961 mots

On a mission to save the climate with legal knowhow

Camilla Hodgson

When the dotcom bubble burst 20 years ago, Susan Mac Cormac, a corporate lawyer at US law ﬁrm Morrison
& Foerster, was asked by her mentor to devise a plan to generate new business.

Mac Cormac, who had recently made partner at the tech-focused ﬁrm, pitched an idea inspired by people
she had met through her husband, who worked at San Francisco's Presidio national park.

"My plan was helping companies become more environmental. And [my mentor] looked at me and said 'I
don't see any money in that'," says Mac Cormac. But she made a convincing case that the effects of climate
change would "fundamentally impact business", and was soon pursuing the idea.

Early efforts were pro bono projects for non-proﬁt organisations. But the number of paying clients gradually
picked   up,   and   Mac   Cormac   has   built   a   career   around   helping   investors   make   greener   decisions   and
integrating sustainability into corporate deals. She chairs two practices: energy, and social enterprise and
impact investing.

Until recently, however, "most people viewed my focus on climate and sustainability as 'good stuff that I did
on the side', not 'real' corporate law work," she says, speaking from her home in San Francisco. "Now, almost
all mainstream companies want to focus on it."

There have never been so many opportunities to work at the intersection of climate and the law. As well as
the growing number of lawsuits aiming to hold governments and companies to account for environmental
damage,   lawyers   can   play   key   roles   in   designing   innovative   funding   models   for   green   projects,   adding
climate-related conditions to deals, and helping companies develop sustainability policies.

At the same time, law ﬁrms and legal teams - and professional services groups, generally - face growing
scrutiny from activists, potential clients and employees about their own climate-related responsibilities. With
banks and asset managers under pressure to divest from the fossil fuel industry, law ﬁrms will increasingly
have to consider the work they take on.

A growing cohort of lawyers is "deeply uncomfortable with the profession's role in facilitating the expansion
of   the   fossil   fuel   industry,"   says   Brynn   O'Brien,   a   former   corporate   and   human   rights   lawyer,   and   now
executive   director   of   shareholder   advocacy   group   the   Australasian   Centre   for   Corporate   Responsibility
(ACCR), based in Australia. Law ﬁrms that are not prepared to grapple with the issue risk losing "the best and
brightest junior lawyers".

Litigation is the most visible legal avenue for tackling climate-related problems. In 2019, the Dutch Supreme
Court upheld a landmark ruling that the government of the Netherlands had a legal duty to prevent climate
change, and ordered it to slash its greenhouse gas emissions. Similar cases ﬁled against other governments
followed, and a growing number are being brought against businesses for their role in adversely affecting
climate.

Kristin   Casper,   interim   general   counsel   and   senior   legal   counsel   for   strategic   litigation   at   Greenpeace
International, says it is only a matter of time before a company is successfully sued for its role in contributing
to climate change.

"There will be one soon," says Casper, who is based in Boulder, Colorado. She started out as an environmental
activist before going to law school to gain another "tool" for bringing about change. "In 2021, we're going to
see the targets of this litigation expand beyond fossil fuel companies".

There are also wide ranging opportunities in corporate law, as Mac Cormac's career shows. She focuses on
late-stage ﬁnancing and helps facilitate "impact investing" - which aims to do good alongside generating
returns   -   and   she   says   she   has   developed   creative   ways   to   channel   investor   money   to   climate-friendly
projects.


One examples is designing housing investment funds that include philanthropic capital, to facilitate the
construction of low-income, energy efﬁcient homes. Another is helping The Nature Conservancy, a non-
proﬁt organisation, create "pop-up wetlands" by paying farmers to ﬂood their ﬁelds, off-season, in California's
Central Valley.


Mac Cormac has also advised clients on changing their corporate structure to enable them to balance
ﬁduciary duties against a social or environmental purpose. Recently, she has developed and adapted that
work to help small businesses access funding after the Covid-19 pandemic ﬁrst hit in 2020. Morrison &
Foerster has dedicated more than $1m in pro bono work to the California Rebuilding Fund.

Shareholders can also use corporate law to push for change. O'Brien started out as a commercial lawyer at
Mallesons Stephen Jaques, which gave her an understanding of "the system and the language [of corporate
law]," and how it could be used to hold companies accountable.

Her work at the ACCR has included using shareholder resolutions to press companies to break ties with
lobby groups, such as the New South Wales Minerals Council, that many argue stand in the way of climate
progress.

But when it comes to law ﬁrms' own actions on tackling climate risk, who they should work with is not a
straightforward question.

Lawyers' 'stewardship role'

Mac   Cormac   says   lawyers   should   help   companies   transition   to   cleaner   business   models,   but   must   be
transparent and selective about the work they accept. They should not, for example, help companies avoid
making climate disclosures.

Greenpeace's Casper says everyone is entitled to legal representation, but law ﬁrms should advise clients "to
do the right thing" for the environment - which would help them avoid future climate-related litigation.

O'Brien adds that lawyers, like institutional investors, have "an important stewardship role". Law ﬁrms should
outline clear rules about what they are prepared to do for heavy polluters, and how climate objectives can be
incorporated into their operations, she argues.

"Were I a law ﬁrm managing partner, I would absolutely be looking to differentiate myself in that way . . . I
hope that some young lawyers read this and think, 'I can have this conversation with my managing partner.'"

