

Financial Times
News, Saturday, March 6, 2021 437 mots, p. 3

Watchdog asked to probe potential conﬂict of interest
Climate advisory committee

CAMILLA HODGSON

The environment adviser to former prime minister Theresa May has asked the government watchdog to
examine a potential conﬂict of interest involving the head of climate change at power group Drax, who is also
a member of the climate advisory committee.

Lord Randall has asked the National Audit Ofﬁce to consider a formal investigation into the positions held by
Rebecca Heaton, the Drax executive who is also a member of the Climate Change Committee that advises
the government.

Heaton has been on the committee since 2017, when her appointment drew criticism from climate activists.
The issue has been raised by Randall as Drax attempts to realign its business to focus on an emerging
technology, known as bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (Beccs).

The CCC has identiﬁed the technology as a potential solution for managing the most difﬁcult aspects of
avoiding carbon emissions. Drax has said its development will require government ﬁnancial support.

"Given the signiﬁcant commercial interests of her employer, Drax, in the policies on which these committees
are advising government, I believe that there may be a real or perceived conﬂict between her role with Drax
and her ability to offer impartial expert advice on such policies," Randall wrote in a letter to the NAO.

Heaton is also a member of the CCC's audit committee, which advises the group on its own governance.

Randall said the NAO should examine whether Heaton's roles allowed Drax to gain "an unfair commercial
advantage through the inﬂuence its employee may be having on the advice and formulation of policy in an
area in which Drax operates".

Drax is one of the world's largest producers of biomass, material including wood pellets and other plant
matter, which is burnt to generate energy. Its biomass operations are reliant on UK government subsidies
due to end in 2027.

The company is working to reduce costs so that these operations remain viable, and also betting on the
Beccs technology, which involves capturing and storing the carbon emissions generated by burning the
biomass.

Deploying Beccs at scale will require an "investment framework" from the government, Drax states on its
website.

The government has pledged up to £1bn to support the development of a carbon capture sector, which
could include new Beccs subsidies.

Chris Stark, chief executive of the CCC, said Heaton was "excluded from all relevant discussions on bioenergy
and bioenergy with carbon capture and storage" in its deliberation for the sixth carbon budget.

Drax said: "Dr Rebecca Heaton does not advise the CCC on bioenergy. This ensures there is no conﬂict of
interest."



