 News, Saturday, February 8, 2020 820 mots, p. 4

Record Antarctic temperature met with sound of cracking ice

As continent experiences warmer weather this week, experts warn of accelerating glacial melt
LESLIE HOOK — ESPERANZA BASE, ANTARCTIC PENINSULA

Brenda Zaccheo was weighing baby penguins when she noticed the unusually warm wind sweeping over the colony that lives on a rocky outcrop at the tip of the Antarctic Peninsula.

"We were wearing these work suits and it was really hot so we had to take them off," said Ms Zaccheo, an Argentine field assistant working at the nearby Esperanza Base research station. Thursday's "strong and warm" breeze "reminded me of the wind in Buenos Aires," she added.

The temperature at Esperanza Base that day was 18.3C, the highest recorded in Antarctica. Surpassing the previous record set five years ago by 0.8C, it underscores how rapidly climate change is affecting the polar region, exacerbating fears about the devastating effects on its glaciers and ice caps. It reflects a warming trend across the Antarctic Peninsula, which is heating up much faster than the rest of the continent.

According to Lieutenant Captain Norman Walter Nahueltripay, chief of the Argentine base, the temperature at this time of year normally ranges between -5C and +5C. "I think it's a product of global warming ... You really see climate change materialising here," he said. Next to the base, two huge waterfalls poured from a melting glacier, underscoring the processes at work.

"One thing we've seen recently is that it rains a lot, rather than snowing," Lieutenant Captain Nahueltripay added. "If you talk to the old-timers who have spent a lot of time here, they're so surprised to hear that there's rain instead of snow."

The Earth has warmed about 1.1C on average since pre-industrial times, but a phenomenon known as polar amplification has ensured that the Antarctic Peninsula warms more quickly. Temperatures in the peninsula rose by about 3C in the 50 years to 2000. While the rate of warming appears to have slowed slightly since then due to natural weather variations, the process is continuing.

One giant glacier near the Esperanza Base is covered with brown dust and soot, and has shrunk noticeably since the outpost was established in 1953.

"People who come back to visit who've been here before always tell us that the glacier used to be much larger," said Ms Zaccheo. The brown colour of the glacier's surface, due to the lack of fresh snow, makes it melt even faster.

"When bright snow and ice is melted and replaced by dark ocean and land, it absorbs rather than reflects the sun's heat," said Martin Siegert, a glaciology professor at Imperial College London. "This means small temperature rises can have big effects."

Esperanza Base consists of a cluster of bright red buildings — including a café, church and school — and it is nearly overrun by penguins from the nearby colony.

In summer, the base is home to several dozen researchers gathering field samples, of everything from feathers to ice and bird vomit. The 38 current residents will remain there until March when they will be replaced by Argentine families who will spend the winter there with their children.

Esperanza Base also experiences unusual temperatures due to a local wind pattern known as a Föhn wind. This phenomena, triggered by strong winds blowing across a mountain range, causes warm air to form on the downwind side of the mountain. John King, professor of ice and climate at the British Antarctic Survey, said the previous record temperature at Esperanza Station had occurred at a time when those winds were present.

"Föhn winds over the Larsen Ice Shelf to the south of Esperanza cause extensive melting," he said.

The Föhn winds "may have contributed to the loss of the northern sections of this ice shelf in recent decades", he added.

Meanwhile, the unusually high temperatures, as well as accelerating the melting of the huge glaciers that cover the volcanic mountains, are also contributing to a reduction in sea ice, which is critical for the survival of many Antarctic animal species.

The melting ice of Antarctica, Greenland and other glaciated areas is leading to a sea level rise of about 3mm per year. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change has predicted that sea levels could rise by as much as one metre by the end of this century due to accelerating ice melt.

The sound of ice cracking and breaking up often echoes across Esperanza Base, residents say, and several noted how the ice had been noisier than usual in recent days.

"Many pieces fell off the glacier yesterday," said Ms Zaccheo. "If it's even 1C [above zero] you can hear the ice crack."

'One thing we've seen recently is that it rains a lot, rather than snowing'
