Rapid global heating is hurting farm productivity, study
finds



Oliver Milman

1 avril 2021

The climate crisis is already eating into the output of the world’s agricultural systems,
with productivity much lower than it would have been if humans hadn’t rapidly heated
the planet, new research has found.

G7 should double help for poorer countries to cut CO2 emissions,
says UN

Advances in technology, fertilizer use and global trade have
allowed food production to keep pace with a booming global
population since the 1960s, albeit with gross inequities that still
leave millions of people suffering from malnutrition.

But rising temperatures in this time have acted as a handbrake to farming productivity of
crops and livestock, according to the new research, published in Nature Climate Change.
Productivity has actually slumped by 21% since 1961, compared to if the world hadn’t
been subjected to human-induced heating.

With the global population set to rise to more than 9 billion by 2050, the UN’s Food and
Agriculture Organization has estimated that food production will have to increase by
about 70%, with annual crop production increasing by almost one 1bn tonnes and meat
production soaring by more than 200m tonnes a year by this point.

Meanwhile, global temperatures are rising at a rate that scientists warn is extremely
dangerous for human civilization.

“The impact already is larger than I thought it would be,” said Ariel Ortiz-Bobea, an
economist at Cornell University who led the research.

“It was a big surprise to me. The worry I have is that research and development in
agriculture takes decades to translate into higher productivity. The projected temperature
increase is so fast I don’t know if we are going to keep pace with that.”

The research measured productivity by inputs – such as labor, fertilizer and equipment –
and the output in food they produce, using a model to determine how climate change has
influenced this relationship.

While farming has generally become far more efficient in recent decades, it is increasingly
menaced by heatwaves that exhaust farm workers and wither certain crops. Extreme
weather events and drought can also affect the output of a farm, particularly smaller
operations in poorer countries.



In 2019, scientists who analyzed the top 10 global crops that provide the majority of our
food calories found that climate change is reducing the worldwide production of staples
such as rice and wheat. Again, less affluent countries are suffering worst from this
situation.

The intensification of farming to boost output has in itself caused major environmental
damage, through the deforestation of grazing land, loss of valuable topsoil, pollution from
pesticides and the release of vast amounts of greenhouse gases that contribute to global
heating.

“Ultimately we want to increase productivity in a changing climate but a bad way to do
that is by increasing inputs such as land and water,” said Ortiz-Bobea. “If we were more
productive we could produce more with less of an environmental footprint.”

Weston Anderson, a researcher of food security and climate at Columbia University who
was not involved in the study, said the new research provides fresh insight into the
magnitude of the impact upon agriculture.

“The regions that this paper highlights as experiencing the largest reductions in
agricultural productivity – Central America and the Sahel – contain some of the least food
secure countries in the world, which is a real concern,” he said.

“It means that populations that were already food insecure are shouldering the heaviest
burden of climate change, and highlights the importance of doing all that we can to
improve agricultural production in these vulnerable regions immediately.”

 

 




