

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
National, Friday, February 12, 2021 603 mots, p. A 12

Biden's Climate Team, Aiming to Restore 'Credibility,' Begins
Tackling New Goals

By Lisa Friedman

The high-level group's ﬁrst meeting focused on job creation and reducing greenhouse gas emissions.

WASHINGTON -- Vice President Kamala Harris and White House aides convened cabinet secretaries and the
acting heads of 21 federal agencies on Thursday to begin fulﬁlling President Biden's promise to mobilize the
entire federal government to confront climate change.

Gina McCarthy, who heads the White House ofﬁce of climate policy, said Thursday's meeting focused on job-
creation as well as ensuring that agency leaders understood their role in helping to set an aggressive new
target for cutting the United States' share of global emissions. The Biden administration wants to announce
those goals on April 22.

"Over the past four years we have not earned a lot of credibility on climate," Ms. McCarthy, who led Thursday's
meeting, said in an interview, adding, "It's time we turn that around."

The National Climate Task Force, which Mr. Biden created as part of a series of executive actions during his
ﬁrst week in ofﬁce, is meant to meet regularly to chart progress on a series of administration goals including
eliminating fossil fuel emissions from the electricity sector by 2035; transitioning federal, state and local
government ﬂeets to zero-emissions vehicles; and increasing conservation while also increasing renewable
energy production on public land and waters.

Mr. Biden campaigned on a pledge to reach net-zero emissions across the economy before 2050, and to
eliminate fossil fuel pollution from the electricity sector by 2035.

Mr.   Biden   has   made   the   case   that   tackling   climate change   by   focusing   on   building   clean   energy
infrastructure will bring economic recovery and create "millions" of new jobs -- a goal economists said faces
serious challenges.

At Thursday's meeting the task force started a new working group to focus on speciﬁc challenges, such as
creating energy storage at a fraction of the current cost and developing sustainable fuels for aircraft and
ships. The administration announced $280 million in combined Energy and Transportation Department
grant opportunities for technology development.

The   talks   took   place   via   Zoom   among   about   50   people,   including   Treasury   Secretary   Janet   Yellen   and
Transportation Secretary Pete Buttigieg, as well as deputies for agencies still waiting for the Senate to
conﬁrm their leaders, such as the Environmental Protection Agency and the Interior Department.

Ali A. Zaidi, the White House deputy national climate adviser, said the goal was a "redeﬁnition of the way
government can operate in the face of great crises," like climate change.

Former Secretary of State John Kerry, now Mr. Biden's global envoy for climate change, spoke to the task
force about the upcoming international negotiations in which the United States, which once again is part of
the Paris Agreement, will take part.

The Obama administration pledged to cut America's emissions up to 28 percent below 2005 levels by 2025.
Former President Donald J. Trump withdrew from the Paris accord and ended all federal efforts to try to
meet that target, leaving the country about halfway to the goal. Mr. Biden will be expected to put forward an
even more aggressive goal that he believes the nation can meet by 2030.

The administration intends to announce that new emissions target at a global leaders' climate summit that
it will host on April 22.



"We're going to look at every opportunity we have to capture the reductions we can defend," Ms. McCarthy

 



said.

