

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
Features, Saturday, January 16, 2021 2395 mots, p. 25,24,26,27,28

Telegraph Magazine

THE DARK SIDE OF GREEN
The clean-energy revolution promises to herald a new era free from pollution. And both
Boris Johnson and Joe Biden are putting money on it. But a new book suggests that in our
race to save the climate, we are destroying the environment and starting a whole new war
over the planet's natural resources. Harry de Quetteville reports

It is a compelling vision: by 2050, this island nation will no longer contribute to greenhouse gas emissions. It
will grace the globe leaving no imprint, no carbon trail to threaten future generations, merely kissing the
surface of the silver sea. Not that we residents will be energy starved, husbanding our watts like misers,
parcelling out energy as if on wartime ration cards, shivering physically and shrivelling economically and
politically. No. Two months ago, Boris Johnson set out how we can have our cake and eat it, consuming at full
tilt as, over the next three decades, a green industrial revolution powers us forward with clean energy and
clean consciences. 'We will harness Mother Nature,' he said. 'Green and growth can go hand-in-hand.'

November was a big month for environmental policy on the other side of the Atlantic too, with Joe Biden's
presidential election victory meaning that America will rejoin the Trump-scorned Paris Agreement, that
landmark 2016 deal to keep global average temperatures from rising more than two degrees above pre-
industrial levels). Like Johnson, Biden has promised a green energy revolution, though on a far grander scale.
While Britain pledges £12 billion of government investment, Biden's plan is to spend £1.5 trillion ($2 trillion).

If Biden sticks to his plan, renewables - including wind, solar, nuclear and hydropower - could become the
world's   biggest   source   of   electricity   by   next   year,   according   to   Fatih   Birol,   head   of   the   International
EnergyAgency.Gasboilers couldbebanned in newly built UK homes from 2023, making way for hydrogen
boilers or heat pumps. Petrol and diesel cars will begin to disappear until sales of them, too, are banned, in
2030. The PM paints a picture of Britons cooking your breakfast using hydrogen power before getting in your
electric car, having charged it overnight from batteries made in the Midlands. Around you the air is cleaner,
and the trucks and trains, ships and planes are running on hydrogen or a synthetic fuel.'

GE Haliade-X 260m

It is a smorgasbord of options to help us generate, store and consume energy in cleaner, more efﬁcient ways.
And it's not impossible.

The UK is already doing well on renewables. Latest ﬁgures show that in 2020 they collectively generated
around 45 per cent of our electricity, up nine per cent on 2019. If the dream of going carbon neutral is truly to
be

Big Ben 96m

realised, however, Britain will need to plug the remaining gap, and there is one obvious way to do that.

Our island makes us singularly wellplaced to capitalise on a wind boom offshore, where gusts are strong and
regular, and NIMBYs less likely to complain.

Eiffel Tower 324m

The Shard 310m

Already the UK is a global leader, with about a third of the globe's 29GW (gigawatt) offshore capacity. And we
are building more fast. The plan is to quadruple our production by 2030.

If completed, it will represent a remarkable endeavour, as we will need not only anchored, shallow-water
turbines but giant, deep-water ﬂoating platforms, too. The turbines themselves will be vast. Currently the
most powerful offshore turbine in the world is GE's Haliade-X, which can power a house for two days with a
single rotation of its blade - it stands 260 metres



 



tall, two-and-a-half times the size of Big Ben. Installation of the ﬁrst Haliade-X ﬁeld in the world, comprising
190 turbines, will begin in 2023 on Dogger Bank off the Yorkshire coast.


Atop these vast machines, behind the rotors, is a giant 'nacelle', which houses all of the components required
to generate the electricity. On the Haliade-X, this nacelle is 11 metres wide and contains the generator, known
as a PMG. The 'M' stands for magnet. A vast magnet. And it is here, at the pinnacle of a technology that
promises to liberate us from pollution and the pressure of poisoning the planet, that the clean green dream
begins to tarnish. For offshore turbines typically use no ordinary magnets.

Firstly, they are enormous in size - the Haliade-X turbine requires seven tonnes of permanent magnets, says
Paul Atherley, chairman of Pensana, a British mining company. Most offshore turbine magnets weigh about
650kg for every MW (megawatt) of power they generate. And for most, about a third of the magnet is
composed of materials with exotic names like neodymium and dysprosium, from a group of metals known
as rare earths. And while rare earths are not rare, they can be very, very dirty. Yet they are very special too.

'They have such amazing properties,' says Guillaume Pitron, a French journalist and documentary-maker
who reports on the global commodities trade, and has now written a book, The Rare Metals War. 'Magnetic,

revolution without them.' In wind turbines it is the magnetic power of rare earths that is prized. 'They are
seven to 10 times more powerful' than standard magnets, says Pitron, dramatically increasing electricity
generation. But rare earths aren't critical only to turbines. Their unique properties are vital in solar panels,
rechargeable batteries, catalytic converters, energy- efﬁcient light bulbs - as well as a vast array of hitech
products unrelated to green energy, including smartphones, camera lenses and missile defence systems -
plus they power the motors in electric cars. Such magnet motors are 'incredibly powerful for their weight,'
says Atherley. 'It's why the [electric] Porsche Taycan can accelerate 0 to 60 faster than Lewis Hamilton's F1
McLaren Mercedes.'

Indeed many forms of green energy are dependent on these rare earths, along with 20 or so cousins called
'rare metals' or 'critical raw materials'. Though known as 'rare', scarcity is not an issue, as they are about as
abundant as silver, and found around the world, including in Britain, says Andrew Bloodworth of the British
Geological Survey. The problem arises, however, in getting them out of the ground.

As these rare elements are distributed in tiny quantities, vast piles of ore need to be dug up, processed and
reﬁned to produce minuscule amounts. For a single kilo of gallium - used in energy-efﬁcient light bulbs - 50
tonnes of rock needs to be excavated, according to Pitron.

Much of this rare earth excavation happens in Baotou, a large city in China's autonomous province of Inner
Mongolia; its population has swollen from under 100,000 to more than 2.5 million as the city has become the
epicentre of the globe's rare metal dependence. China supplies around 98 per cent of these critical resources
to Europe, and Baotou has paid the price. North of the

dug up, to its west are the reﬁneries and alongside, a vast artiﬁcial tailings lake, black and sludgy: 'Ten square
kilometres of toxic efﬂuent,' as Pitron puts it. For Atherley, who has spent his career in mining, Baotou is
'horrible environmental disaster'.

'There's no getting away from the fact that we need to reduce the environmental footprint of rare-earth
extraction,'   says   Bloodworth.   Especially   because,   as   he   concedes,   they   are   irreplaceable.   'Nothing   else
performs as well as they do.'

There are obvious solutions. We could consume less. But the green revolution just beginning. 'This is the
biggest energy transition in history,' says Atherley. Bloodworth agrees. 'We're going to be increasingly reliant
on renewable technologies,' he says. 'There's no doubt we're going to need lot more rare earths in the future.'
Pitron says growth of demand 'is exponential', with consumption for various metals increasing ﬁve-, nine- or
20-fold in the next few years.

What about reuse? 'The big one that everyone wants to do is recycle these things [rare earths] more,' says
Bloodworth. But that is extremely hard, precisely because they are so magnetic. And they are often used in
tiny quantities, combined with other materials. 'It's hard to separate.' Consequently, current recycling rates
are pitiful, writes Pitron: 'would be a stunning achievement for manufacturers to one day be able to recycle
just 10 percent of rare-earth metals.'

Many renewables are, it turns out, particularly difﬁcult to renew themselves. 'We tend to think of solar panels
as clean, but the truth is that there is no adequate plan to deal with solar panels at the end their 20- or 25-
year life,' notes Michael Shellenberger, author of Apocalypse Never. 'In the effort to try to save the climate, are

 





we destroying the environment?'


Extraction and recycling are just two

1kg of gallium used in energy-efﬁcient light bulbs 50 tonnes of rock needs to be excavated

FIVE OF THE MOST COMMON RARE EARTHS

NEODYMIUM Properties Powerful magnetism Used in Wind turbines/ electric car motors, laptops

OFTEN PAIRED WITH

DYSPROSIUM Properties Magnetic Used in Wind turbines, electric car motors

TERBIUM Properties Optical Used in Smartphone screens to produce vibrant colours

CERIUM Properties Catalytic Used in Catalytic converters cars

GADOLINIUM Properties Optical and magnetic Used in

several problems with renewables, says Shellenberger. Threat to wildlife is also an issue - and not only a result
of mining. As solar farms need to be extremely large, building them can involve displacing animals; wind
farms threaten birds, in particular, says Shellenberger, 'big, slow-to-reproduce birds: kites, raptors, eagles and
hawks and owls'.

Another downside is reliability or, in the jargon, 'intermittency' - wind power can only be generated when it's
windy,   and   solar   power   when   it's   sunny.   A   recent   McKinsey   report   detailed   how   Germany's   increasing
reliance on solar and wind almost led to blackouts in June 2019. When largely nuclear France tried to
integrate a lot of wind energy on to its grid, says Shellenberger, it had to expand fossil fuel provision as a
backup. 'The result was actually an increase in carbon emissions.

'Renewables are just not what people think they are. People think that they harmonise society with the
natural world but that's fantasy. Renewables can't save the planet, are we going to keep letting them destroy
it?'

The high environmental price of rare earths would seem prohibitive for Britain - yet British companies are
interested in onshoring parts of this currently dirty process, including Pensana, which recently announced a
processing site outside Hull to produce a 'sustainable rare earths supply chain' from ore mined in Angola.
'The processes we're using are super-clean, different to those elsewhere in the world, notably China,' insists
Atherley. There is, of course, also a strategic element to securing new supply lines beyond China. 'The North
Sea power hub? is going to be six times bigger than China's Three Gorges

Dam. The biggest energy installation on the planet ever,' he continues. 'You can't have that reliant on just one
country.'

Annual trade of rare earths is currently a mere $6.5 billion - some 276 times less valuable than oil, says Pitron.
However, they are beginning to assume black gold's geopolitical signiﬁcance. 'We have to get them, but how
are we going to secure them?' he asks. 'Which countries will become the new Saudi Arabias of rare metals?
Argentina,

Indonesia,   South   Africa,   Russia,   China,   Kazakhstan   will   try   to   gain   inﬂuence   because   they   have   these
resources we need. And we're going to be competing with other countries for access, which will bring
tensions. There is a risk that all the conﬂict around oil access in the 20th century will repeat itself over this
"new oil".'

Last September, the EU announced an Action Plan on Critical Raw Materials. Commissioner Thierry Breton
talked of 'strategic autonomy' by 'forging alliances' with Canada and Australia - both known to have reserves
of rare earths - and also by digging for the metals in Europe. Though there is no recent history of mining rare
earth elements in Europe, deposits have been identiﬁed in Greenland and Sweden.

Indeed, sourcing rare earths closer to home will become increasingly important as pressure on companies to
change   their   practices   grows.   The   era   of   'greenwashing'   (using   superﬁcial   corporate   gestures   of
environmentalism) is over, says Michelle Davies, international head of clean energy and sustainability for
global law ﬁrm Eversheds Sutherland. 'The level of scrutiny is going to be far beyond anything that business

 





people have had to experience today.'


As for the argument that it affects wildlife, she says, 'Don't underestimate how difﬁcult it is to get one of
these   projects   permitted.'   This   hurdle,   together   with   the   others   associated   with   green   energy,   such   as
recycling and reliability, can be overcome, she says. 'It's not a deal-breaker for renewables.'

After all, extraction of anything has an environmental cost. 'The world produces about a billion tonnes of iron
and steel every year,' points out Andrew Bloodworth. 'It produces about 200,000 tonnes of rare earth [ore].'
Volume alone dictates that 'the environmental impact of the production of those big industrial metals is far,
far greater'.

Pound for pound, however, rare earths are vastly more intensive to extract and reﬁne. To Shellenberger that,
in combination with renewables' unreliable, diffuse power, makes the entire green-energy revolution - Boris's
billions and Biden's trillions - a vast mistake.

'Renewables are going to have to fail, and they will fail spectacularly everywhere over the next several years,
before we discover that really there's no alternative, in terms of climate change, to doing a lot of nuclear.'

Pitron is not so sure. 'I am not against green energy,' he says. But he is concerned that we are escaping one
trap merely to fall into another. 'We will have so many environmental impacts to get these metals. Bigger
mines, deeper mines, even in the oceans. We are moving into a situation where, in 20 years, the cost of green
technologies will actually be superior to the beneﬁts. It's crazy.'

People think renewables harmonise society with nature but that's fantasy' 'There's no alternative, in terms of
climate change, to doing a lot of nuclear'

