 News, Saturday, December 18, 2021 376 mots, p. 16  Climate change leaves schools of fish at mercy of predators By Emily-Jane Heap  FISH schools are losing their tight formation as a result of climate change, which leaves them more vulnerable to predators, researchers have found.  Fish typically swim in schools, making them less likely to be eaten. But a study by the University of Adelaide has found the defensive characteristic is being disrupted by ocean acidification, caused by climate change, making it easier for whales, dolphins, seabirds and other predators to target them.  Typically schools will head right when under threat from a predator, but scientists found this tendency was much more diminished as a result of ocean acidification.  The rising concentration of carbon dioxide in the atmosphere is driving up sea surface temperatures, which is causing more acidic and corrosive water to rise towards the surface.  Researchers carried out experiments in order to evaluate how species interact and behave in different ways with changing water temperatures and acidification. Fish were exposed to one of 12 treatments over a 38-day period. These included a combination of temperatures and different shoal types.  Professor Ivan Nagelkerken, lead author of the study, said: "Fish show gregarious behaviour and cluster in shoals which helps them to acquire food and for protection against predators. Many gregarious tropical species are shifting poleward under ocean warming and interacting in new ways with fish in more temperate areas."  Angus Mitchell, a PhD student, said: "We found tropical and temperate fish species tend to move to the right when co-ordinating together in a shoal, especially when spooked by a predator. But this bias significantly diminished under ocean acidification."  The study also discovered that ocean acidification led tropical fish to become bolder after four weeks, while temperate fish became bolder with increasing temperatures and ocean acidification dampened their boldness.  The study's co-author, Professor David Booth of the University of Technology, Sydney, said: "Our findings highlight the direct effect of climate stressors on fish behaviour and the interplay with the indirect effects of new species interactions."  Professor Nagelkerken added: "Strong shoal cohesion and co-ordi nated movement affect the survival of a species.  "Tropical species may initially fare poorly when moving into new temperate areas."  'Many gregarious tropical species are shifting poleward under ocean warming and interacting in new ways' 