

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Wednesday, January 6, 2021 391 mots, p. 12

UK heatwaves to intensify as climate change accelerates

By Olivia Rudgard

BRITISH summer temperatures are set to rise faster than the global average, as scientists warn heatwaves
will be more intense.

The climate is expected to warm up to 50 per cent more quickly than the average rate of global warming,
with extremely hot days getting even hotter.

A study by researchers at the University of Bristol found that for every half degree that global temperatures
rise, UK temperatures are likely to rise by 0.75C in the summer months.

Data analysis for Wales suggests that if the world on average warmed by 3C, the hottest days would increase
to 28.9C (84F), up from 25.1C (77F) over the past 30 years. Its climate would shift from being similar to north-
west England to being more similar to the south, with temperatures exceeding those seen in London over
the past three decades.

The difference is because global average warming models include ﬁgures for oceanic areas, which are not
warming as quickly as land areas. This means the temperatures that many people are likely to experience are
not fully represented in global warming projections.

The   team   analysed   a   simulation   produced   by   the   Met   Ofﬁce   and   compared   it   with   recent   summers,
concluding that it was a reliable indicator of future UK temperatures.

Dr Alan Kennedy-Asser, report lead author, said: "It's useful to see how the UK climate relates to these global
targets. A global target is kind of meaningless to an individual person, a city or a small country like the UK."

Warming in the northern hemisphere and further from the equator is also more pronounced, with the
Arctic circle warming at twice the global average rate. The British climate is affected by the north Atlantic,
which is warming more slowly than other parts of the world, while Europe and Russia are warming more
quickly.

Last year, a Met Ofﬁce study found that temperatures exceeding 35C (95F) were becoming more common in
the South East, and that areas in the North were likely to exceed 30C (86F) at least once per decade by 2100.
The UK record temperature of 38.7C (101.7F) was set in Cambridge in July 2019.

0.75C UK temperatures are likely to warm up by this amount in the summer months for every half degree rise
in the global average



 


