Climate crisis: I used to mull when to have children. Now I ask if I should I have them.

Reliable COVID vaccines spark optimism about 2021 and beyond. There is no vaccine for the climate crisis, but we must create a similar promising future.
Dr. Neelu Tummala | Opinion contributor
The COVID-19 pandemic has raised concerns about whether public health agencies should advise women to postpone pregnancy because of potential virus-related risks. Not surprisingly, there are multiple ethical considerations to such recommendations, with reproduction ultimately being a very personal and private decision. One important factor is the control many women (although admittedly not all) are able to exercise in choosing their risk exposure to the coronavirus. That is a stark contrast to the risks associated with the climate crisis, where the very air women breathe and the heat waves they are exposed to increase pregnancy-related complications.
A recent study reveals that roughly 25% of childless adults consider climate change in their decision not to have children. Over the past 20 years of my own life, my thoughts toward starting a family have always revolved around timing. When is the right time for me? It wasn't the carefree years of college, the studious years of medical school or the overworked years of residency. Now, as I continue to look forward, the question of when is accompanied by a previously unthinkable thought: Should I?
Environmental inaction affects choices
People across the world are considering the climate crisis in their decision not to have children. For some, the decision is based on the uncertainty of the future. For others, the concern centers around the increased carbon footprint of another child. And still for others it is a moral issue. This is a complex and emotional question that I have no answer to, nor do I offer judgment on others' choices. What is clear, however, is that environmental inaction influences this decision of personal reproduction.
The health and economic challenges of 2020 are unparalleled in recent history, but continuing vaccine rollouts allow for an optimistic outlook for 2021 and beyond. There is no vaccine for the climate crisis, however, which is why aggressive action is needed to create a similar promising future.
Without aggressive climate action, predictions of the future include hunger, disease, war and death. The Department of Defense has declared climate change a threat to national security. As sea levels rise and weather becomes more extreme, there will be food


and water scarcity. People around the world will be forced to migrate, leading to land shortages and civil unrest. It is a world that looks nothing like the one into which we or our parents were born. And it is a world into which 1 in 4 adults are concerned about bringing life.
Beyond Trumpism: Joe Biden can work with conservatives on climate change. Many of them are ready to act.
The uncertainty of the future is best exemplified through its impacts on our health. Or maybe, as a physician, this is the variable that scares me the most. In children, global warming already contributes to an increased risk of mental health disease, greater risk of heat stress and increased risk of malnutrition. Continued warming affects children's health in ways that medicine has only started to discover and, in the absence of climate action, will multiply in unimaginably devastating ways.
The incentives aren't just economic
The concerns of the climate crisis are growing exponentially. As compared with Generation X individuals (those born between 1965 and 1980), there is a 55% increase in the percentage of millennials who consider climate change in their reproductive decisions, and a 68% increase for Generation Z individuals. In just one generation, this is a nearly 25% increase.
The overwhelming question is, how do we stop this?
President-elect Joe Biden ran on an ambitious climate agenda that aims for net zero emissions from the electricity sector by 2035 and from the entire U.S. economy by 2050. That would be the most progressive climate strategy the United States has attempted. He plans to spend nearly $2 trillion on clean energy initiatives that will create jobs, such as making buildings more energy efficient, investing in public transportation and supporting vehicle electrification.
When he introduced his seasoned and diverse climate team Saturday, Biden said his administration would focus on jobs, environmental justice and getting "back in the business of leading the world on climate change."
Climate change: Many of the states most at risk are also the least prepared
For his climate plan to succeed, it needs support from the House, the Senate and, by extension, all of us. Now is the time to demand all of our newly elected leaders to prioritize the future so that each generation can freely embrace the decision to bring a child into a safe and healthy world.
A question politicians commonly ask about responding to the climate crisis is: How much will it cost? There is an economic incentive for climate action, and a priceless one: making pregnancy as safe as possible, and allowing prospective parents to make a decision about starting a family as a personal decision, not one influenced by environmental concerns.




