CARE Climate Change  CARE International's expectations for the 2014 climate talks in Lima, Peru  PURPOSE OF THIS PAPER This paper outlines key issues on the agenda at this year's UN climate talks to be held in Lima, Peru (COP20) and summarises CARE's key expectations.   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY A young man looks for his belongings following Typhoon Haiyan in November 2013. The typhoon was one of the strongest tropical cyclones to make landfall, destroying lives and livelihoods. Climate change is already exacerbating extreme weather events such as this one. © CARE / Peter Caton  One of the greatest inequalities of our time is reflected in the causes and consequences of climate change, which increasingly threatens the livelihoods of billions of people. However, the world's poorest and most vulnerable, who are least responsible for causing climate change, will unfairly continue to bear the brunt of its impacts. This is an extreme global injustice. If the global community fails to take action, the consequences for humanity, both with regard to food and nutrition security and more broadly, will be devastating. It will further spur humanitarian crises ­ including conflict, disasters and situations of chronic insecurity and vulnerability ­ undermine people's enjoyment of human rights and further exacerbate gender inequality. With this, CARE's vision of a world of hope, tolerance and social justice, where poverty has been overcome and people live in dignity and security will increasingly become impossible to achieve if serious action on climate change is further delayed. This is why CARE believes that policy responses to climate change must also be equitable by contributing to improving the  livelihoods of poor and marginalised people worldwide. The United Nations' Framework Convention on Climate Change (UNFCCC) conference, COP20, which takes place this year in Lima, Peru, is an important milestone in the negotiations towards a new climate change deal to be agreed in Paris at the end of 2015. COP20 comes at the end of a year which has seen intense focus on climate change. Record levels of greenhouse gas emissions, and the unprecedented concentration of atmospheric CO2, which reached 400ppm in 2013, amount to planetary alarm bells. Record-breaking temperatures signal that by the end of 2014, this year may prove to be the hottest on record globally, rubbishing any claims that a "global warming pause" might buy us time. The findings of the Fifth Assessment Report from the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) are yet another clarion call to action which shows that past failure to cut emissions and to prepare for climate impacts is already undermining people's efforts to achieve sustainable development around the globe. But the IPCC's findings, approved by nearly all governments, also tell us that avoiding the very worst impacts of climate change is still possible and beneficial. But tackling climate change requires a real and urgent step change in ambition from governments, businesses and societies to address the problem and to find solutions. In essence, it requires a rapid shift away from emissions-intensive development models which cause climate change, particularly in developed countries, which have triggered current levels of warming. This year's UN climate talks (COP20) must be a turning point. Governments have to demonstrate that they are willing to take serious action on climate change and they must succeed in laying the foundations of a progressive climate deal in Paris at COP21 in 2015. Such a deal must begin to correct the fact that some nations have much greater historical responsibility for contributing to the bulk of greenhouse gas emissions, but have taken little climate action so far. The deal must also tackle the issue of climate justice and, most importantly, the fact that those least responsible for climate change suffer its greatest impacts. If COP20 fails to address these critical issues the prospects of achieving an ambitious and effective outcome at COP21 will be dire. In order to get on the path to action, CARE demands that governments at COP20:  development in developing countries by ensuring developed countries pledge USD15 billion to the Green Climate Fund and provide clarity as to how they plan to ramp up public finance up to 2020. 5. Strengthen adaptation and disaster risk reduction by increasing support for national adaptation planning in developing countries and promoting and financing best practice in community-based and gender-equitable adaptation. 6. Progress the international mechanism on loss and damage from climate impacts and help it to become an effective institution to address climate­related loss and damage experienced by those who are most vulnerable to it. Also hold accountable those who have contributed most to global emissions by agreeing an ambitious 2-year work plan, by adopting modalities (including the setting-up of a financial and a technical facility) and by agreeing the composition of the mechanism's governance body. 7. Promote action that strengthens the food and nutrition security and right to food of poor and vulnerable people, and ensures compliance with social and environmental safeguards in activities related to agriculture, land use and forest conservation.  1. Urgently ramp up action to shift away from emissions-intensive development models, by urging all countries to (a) step up their pre-2020 mitigation efforts (particularly developed countries, who also need to support developing countries to do so), (b) ensure global emissions peak before 2020, (c) focus on promoting sustainable renewable energies, (d) promote divestment from fossil fuels and start phasing out coal.  2. Go all out to achieve a strong draft text which forms the basis of a rights-based, fair, ambitious and binding climate deal to be agreed by 2015, which aims to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees C, phase out emissions and ramp up action on climate change impacts and emergencies (see table 1).  3. Promote gender equality in climate action in decisions taken at this year's COP, and across the UNFCCC, including in the draft 2015 agreement text, climate funds, and national adaptation planning guidelines.  4. Urgently make financial and technical resources available to promote low-emission and climate-resilient    Table 1: CARE's key demands for the 2015 climate change agreement Key demands for the 2015 agreement on a Protocol with legally binding obligations Overarching elements To include: A global vision for a low-carbon and climate-resilient world, where all societies attain sustainable development and prosperity and overcome poverty within planetary boundaries; A clear recognition of countries' common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, including historic and current; A clear call for all parts of society to contribute to a low-carbon and climate resilient world according to their capabilities and responsibilities. Commit to a rights-based, gender-equitable and participatory approach when designing and implementing action on climate change. Clearly recognise that mitigation, adaptation, and loss and damage are inextricably linked, and that more mitigation will mean less need for adaptation and less loss and damage. Reducing risks through limiting warming: mitigation and low-emission development Commit to collectively delivering sufficient mitigation in line with a carbon budget consistent with limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees C, based on the principles of the Convention, on historic and evolving responsibilities and capabilities, and equity of effort, risk and opportunity sharing. Aim to phase out fossil fuel emissions and achieve a 100% sustainable renewable energy future and access to sustainable energy for all before 2050. Each Party to commit to increase, over time, its climate ambition, without back-tracking, and to deliver minimum commitments at least every 5 years (with longer-term indicative targets) in line with each country's fair carbon budget share. Incentivise and enable leadership and ambition by Parties which are forerunners, such as those with emission phase-out or 100% sustainable renewable energy targets. Reducing risks by preparing for climate change impacts: adaptation Establish an ambitious global adaptation goal based on individual and collective responsibility that (among others) links the level of warming expected from Parties' collective mitigation contributions to the level of support provided to poor countries and communities. Encourage all countries to integrate climate risks into development planning and to prepare national adaptation plans or similar instruments. Regularly communicate national contributions to adaptation. Establish citizen-focussed national monitoring systems. Establish mechanisms to assess progress towards the global goal which take account of the implications of collective mitigation action on national adaptation plans and involve the UN High Commissioner on Human Rights and other relevant institutions. Build on the current institutional adaptation architecture and work to increase its impact, particularly when it comes to significantly scaling-up the exchange of knowledge between global, regional, national and sub-national levels and building capacity. Addressing unavoidable impacts: loss and damage Recognise that loss and damage beyond that which can be reduced by mitigation and adaptation needs to be anchored in the 2015 Paris agreement separately from adaptation. Emphasise that past greenhouse gas emissions are the main cause of climate change and associated loss and damage. Agree to build on the current Loss and Damage Mechanism, based on responsibilities for past and current emissions, and work to increase its impact, including by providing finance for those suffering loss and damage. Climate finance and other means of implementation Establish global public finance goals (in particular for adaptation and loss and damage) based on historic and evolving responsibilities and capabilities, as an obligation for developed and other capable countries to provide uninterrupted finance for action in vulnerable developing countries, complemented by revenues from other sources such as international transport. Commit to shift (finance and policy) away from fossil fuels and emissions-intensive approaches towards universal and fair access to clean sustainable energy (renewable energy and energy efficiency). Agree to build on the current institutional climate financial architecture and work to increase its impact.  CARE assessment  This assessment is based on the Advanced Durban Platform's (ADP) non-paper issued on 11 November 2014, recognising that nothing in the text is yet agreed by governments. Key to colours used: Red: language is currently missing or very weak. Yellow: addressed in principle but a) at extreme risk because only listed as one option among others or b) should be strengthened. Green: adequately addressed in general terms.    INTRODUCTION Nancy Montero Campos (47) from Unas village near Huancayo, Junín Province, Peru explains how storing and planting native potatoes is helping families to deal with erratic water conditions and boost their income. © Zak Bennett / CARE  In 2015, governments will seek to agree three major international policy frameworks with long-term implications reaching at least to 2030. These include a post-2015 sustainable development framework1, a UN climate change agreement, and a post-2015 framework for disaster risk reduction. The collective ambition of governments agreeing these frameworks will show the world whether they are prepared to take the steps required to prevent further climate disruption which is already undermining efforts to overcome poverty and inequality, or whether the public will have to exert much more pressure on them to do so. COP20 is an important milestone in the negotiations towards a new climate change deal to be agreed next year in Paris. A year ago, CARE's summary of the outcomes of COP19, the UN climate talks held in Warsaw, No surrender to climate chaos, concluded with an outlook for 2014, which we called the "year of climate ambition". COP20 comes at the end of a year that has seen intense focus on climate change. Record levels of greenhouse gas emissions, and the unprecedented concentration of atmospheric CO2, which reached 400ppm in 2013, amount to planetary alarm bells. Record-breaking temperatures signal that by the end of 2014, this year may prove to be the hottest on record globally, rubbishing any claims that a "global warming pause" might buy us time. The  Fifth Assessment Report from the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) is yet another clarion call to action which shows that past failure to cut emissions and to prepare for climate impacts is already undermining people's efforts to achieve sustainable development around the globe. But the IPCC's findings, approved by nearly all governments, also tell us that avoiding the very worst impacts of climate change is still possible and beneficial. But tackling climate change requires a real and urgent step change in ambition from governments, businesses and societies to address the problem and to find solutions. In essence, it requires a rapid shift away from emissions-intensive development models which cause climate change, particularly in developed countries, which have triggered current levels of warming. It's now clearer than ever that humanity is left with a choice of radical options. On the one hand, not changing course will leave us and future generations with a planet fundamentally damaged by climate change impacts. On the other hand, radically changing production and consumption of energy, and challenging conventional fossil fuel business models, increasingly looks like the only viable option to ensure sustainable development and is actually a far less radical choice than continuing with a business-as-usual approach.    Box 1: Key findings from the IPCC Fifth Assessment Synthesis Report2 · Human influence on the climate system is clear, and recent man-made emissions of greenhouse gases are the highest in history. Recent climatic changes have had widespread impacts such as retreat of mountain glaciers, ocean acidification, and temperature extremes. · Continued emissions will further increase the likelihood of severe, pervasive and irreversible impacts for people and ecosystems, and some risks from climate damage are already unavoidable, even with mitigation and adaptation. · Climate change is projected to undermine food security; global marine species' redistribution and reduction in sensitive regions will challenge the provision of fisheries productivity. For wheat, rice, and maize in tropical and temperate regions, climate change without adaptation is projected to negatively impact production where local temperature increases reach 2 degrees C or more. · Climate change impacts are already making poverty reduction more difficult, and creating new poverty traps, the latter particularly in urban areas and emerging hotspots of hunger. · Rural areas are expected to experience major impacts on water availability and supply, and on food security, including shifts in the production areas of food and non-food crops around the world. · Risks are unevenly distributed and are generally greater for disadvantaged people and communities in countries at all levels of development. · Aggregate economic losses accelerate, and the likelihood of exceeding adaptation limits rises, with increasing temperature; there is a gap between global adaptation needs and the funds available. · Delaying additional mitigation to 2030 will make it much more difficult to limit warming to below 2 degrees C and will require much higher rates of reduction from 2030 to 2050. · Mankind has already used up most of the carbon in its carbon budget, essentially the amount of carbon that can be released while keeping global warming to well below 2 degrees C; at current rates the remainder of the budget will be used up in less than 30 years. · It is still possible to limit warming to about 1.5 degrees C or maybe even less. To achieve this, greenhouse gas emissions will probably need to be reduced by somewhere between 70% and 95% by 2050. · Adaptation and mitigation are complementary strategies for reducing and managing the risks of climate change. Substantial and immediate emissions reductions can reduce climate risks in the 21st century and beyond, increase prospects for effective adaptation, reduce the costs and challenges of mitigation, and contribute to climate-resilient pathways for sustainable development.  1. Cutting emissions: COP20's role in boosting action before 2020 All governments have repeatedly noted in previous COP decisions that there is a clear gap between the emissions reductions actions required to keep average global warming to below 2 degrees C, and ideally to 1.5 degrees C, and the collective level of ambition governments have so far demonstrated to achieve this. This is known as the `emissions gap'. In particular, developed countries now lag far behind the 25-40% emissions reductions required by 2020 (compared to 1990 levels) which have been identified as fair and adequate. A recent report from the Overseas Development Institute also reveals the extreme  level of subsidies that many G20 governments are providing to fossil fuel companies for exploration, which is totally inconsistent with required climate action.3 This lack of ambition continues to be a major roadblock to achieving an ambitious global climate change agreement. But the options are now clearly on the table. These include promoting sustainable renewable energy and energy efficiency, forest protection, phasing out fossil fuel subsidies and accelerating the shift away from polluting coal-fired power generation by shutting down the least efficient plants first, for example. Also, the IPCC's latest report also highlights that without mitigation, adaptation will increasingly fail (see box 1). This is a key reason why CARE, working with many vulnerable people around the world to build communities' climate resilience, is so concerned about the lack of global ambition to reduce emissions. In progressing along the road to Paris, the UN climate process in 2014 originally hoped to contribute to closing the emissions gap through two key events. Unfortunately, the extraordinary high-level ministerial meetings during the UNFCCC session in Bonn in June 2014 made little substantial progress. The UN climate summit held in September 2014 created significant momentum and resulted in the announcement of several multi-stakeholder action initiatives. However, the UN climate summit fell short of delivering tangible new government commitments for additional action. The Climate Action Tracker concluded that "the impact of all announcements on global temperature increase is not yet clear, but do not yet present a step change. With current policies we are on track towards 3.7 degrees C."4 COP20 could make a difference if Parties send the clearest signal possible that the paradigm shift must not begin tomorrow, or in 2020, but right now. The UNFCCC draft decision text on pre-2020 ambition released on 11 November contains some crucial elements in principle. It acknowledges the emissions gap, urges developed countries to increase their 2020 targets and urges developing countries to step up their efforts. It also addresses the obvious need for financial and technical support from developed countries (see section 3). But the decision text needs to go further and should: · State clearly that the objective is for global emissions to peak well before 2020 and decline thereafter, with developed countries taking a leading role. · Explicitly promote sustainable renewable energies and energy efficiency. · Urge countries to make progress on pricing carbon emissions and phasing out subsidies for fossil fuels in a poverty-sensitive manner, and to promote divestment from fossil fuels and start phasing out coal. Governments should also agree to assess the progress they have made towards closing the emissions gap next year. 2. The new 2015 climate treaty: COP20 must move key elements forward In 2011, governments started the negotiation process towards a new global climate change agreement with  new and binding commitments for all countries. This is due to be concluded at COP21, and should come into force no later than 2020. In CARE's view, the new agreement should build on the UNFCCC, including its principles and commitments. It also needs to be fair, legally binding and ambitious enough to allow the world to limit global warming to 1.5 degrees C. Equity must also be a defining parameter. Developed countries have an historic responsibility to take urgent action as they have contributed the most to causing climate change they need to do the most to tackle it. However, a simple twofold approach ­ with developed countries in one camp, and developing countries in the other, does not address the complex reality of the issues. While developed countries are responsible for the majority of historic emissions, the share of global emissions caused by a number of emerging economies has increased significantly in recent years, so limiting global warming sufficiently will require action globally. The good news is that many clean energy and other solutions are now available to deliver internationally and nationally equitable actions to reduce emissions. The second dimension of equity must consider nationally equitable responses that do not undermine the rights of people living in poverty, but rather seek to improve their livelihoods. Overall, CARE is calling for "language in the 2015 climate agreement that provides that Parties shall, in all climate change related actions, respect, protect, promote and fulfil human rights for all", as stated in an Open Letter from Special Procedures mandate-holders of the Human Rights Council to the Parties of the UNFCCC in October 2014.5 This letter also suggests launching a work programme at COP20 to ensure that human rights are integrated into all aspects of climate action. Governments must leave Lima with a consolidated negotiating text to be used as the basis of the 2015 agreement. It must contain sufficient detail on all of the key elements and it must be ready for countries to consider at least six months before COP21. Work on this text has been the major focus of negotiation sessions this year. CARE's main demands for the 2015 agreement are set out in table 1. Our assessment of the extent to which the current negotiation non-paper released on 11 November 20146 has the potential to deliver on these objectives are represented as colours.    Table 1: CARE's key demands for the 2015 climate change agreement Key demands for the 2015 agreement on a Protocol with legally binding obligations Overarching elements To include: A global vision for a low-carbon and climate-resilient world, where all societies attain sustainable development and prosperity and overcome poverty within planetary boundaries; A clear recognition of countries' common but differentiated responsibilities and respective capabilities, including historic and current; A clear call for all parts of society to contribute to a low-carbon and climate resilient world according to their capabilities and responsibilities. Commit to a rights-based, gender-equitable and participatory approach when designing and implementing action on climate change. Clearly recognise that mitigation, adaptation, and loss and damage are inextricably linked, and that more mitigation will mean less need for adaptation and less loss and damage. Reducing risks through limiting warming: mitigation and low-emission development Commit to collectively delivering sufficient mitigation in line with a carbon budget consistent with limiting global warming to 1.5 degrees C, based on the principles of the Convention, on historic and evolving responsibilities and capabilities, and equity of effort, risk and opportunity sharing. Aim to phase out fossil fuel emissions and achieve a 100% sustainable renewable energy future and access to sustainable energy for all before 2050. Each Party to commit to increase, over time, its climate ambition, without back-tracking, and to deliver minimum commitments at least every 5 years (with longer-term indicative targets) in line with each country's fair carbon budget share. Incentivise and enable leadership and ambition by Parties which are forerunners, such as those with emission phase-out or 100% sustainable renewable energy targets. Reducing risks by preparing for climate change impacts: adaptation Establish an ambitious global adaptation goal based on individual and collective responsibility that (among others) links the level of warming expected from Parties' collective mitigation contributions to the level of support provided to poor countries and communities. Encourage all countries to integrate climate risks into development planning and to prepare national adaptation plans or similar instruments. Regularly communicate national contributions to adaptation. Establish citizen-focussed national monitoring systems. Establish mechanisms to assess progress towards the global goal which take account of the implications of collective mitigation action on national adaptation plans and involve the UN High Commissioner on Human Rights and other relevant institutions. Build on the current institutional adaptation architecture and work to increase its impact, particularly when it comes to significantly scaling-up the exchange of knowledge between global, regional, national and sub-national levels and building capacity. Addressing unavoidable impacts: loss and damage Recognise that loss and damage beyond that which can be reduced by mitigation and adaptation needs to be anchored in the 2015 Paris agreement separately from adaptation. Emphasise that past greenhouse gas emissions are the main cause of climate change and associated loss and damage. Agree to build on the current Loss and Damage Mechanism, based on responsibilities for past and current emissions, and work to increase its impact, including by providing finance for those suffering loss and damage. Climate finance and other means of implementation Establish global public finance goals (in particular for adaptation and loss and damage) based on historic and evolving responsibilities and capabilities, as an obligation for developed and other capable countries to provide uninterrupted finance for action in vulnerable developing countries, complemented by revenues from other sources such as international transport. Commit to shift (finance and policy) away from fossil fuels and emissions-intensive approaches towards universal and fair access to clean sustainable energy (renewable energy and energy efficiency). Agree to build on the current institutional climate financial architecture and work to increase its impact.  CARE assessment  This assessment is based on the Advanced Durban Platform's (ADP) non-paper issued on 11 November 2014, recognising that nothing in the text is yet agreed by governments. Key to colours used: Red: language is currently missing or very weak. Yellow: addressed in principle but a) at extreme risk because only listed as one option among others or b) should be strengthened. Green: adequately addressed in general terms.    INTENDED NATIONALLY DETERMINED CONTRIBUTIONS (INDCs) Another key element linked to the negotiations on the post-2020 treaty will be reaching agreement on the key information to be included in intended nationally determined contributions (INDCs). INDCs will set out countries' post2020 commitments to limit or reduce emissions (e.g. national absolute reduction targets, or sectoral reduction targets). The European Union's (EU) decisions at the end of October make it the first to move on post-2020 mitigation action. Unfortunately, the agreed 40% reduction target for 2030 (along with insufficient targets for renewable energies and improving energy efficiency) falls short of what the EU needs to do to ensure it takes a fair and adequate share of the burden. Nevertheless, in light of the Paris process, the EU has signalled its openness to scale up. The fact that the USA and China jointly announced indicative post-2020 mitigation targets on 11 November adds momentum to and puts pressure on other major economies to follow suit. However, initial analysis also suggests that the ambition of these announcements lags behind what is possible, what is fair and what is required of both countries to keep the world on a 1.5 degree C pathway.7 So, while as of now there is little reason to be overly optimistic about the courage of most governments, we must still take advantage of domestic pressure and COP20 to raise the bar. That is why agreement in Lima on the key parameters is crucial. All developed countries and other major emitters must deliver truly ambitious post-2020 mitigation action plans by March 2015, clearly spelling out why they think their plans are ambitious, fair and equitable. This must be followed by an in-depth review by independent analysts with a view to identifying the remaining emissions gap in pursuit of a 1.5 degrees C pathway and the actions required to close it. It is increasingly clear that the next global climate agreement can only be successful if developed countries make clear their financial commitments to help developing countries take action. In recent negotiations, developed countries have rejected the inclusion of financial targets in their INDCs, but have not yet provided a clear answer as to how they want to address financial commitments (despite their obligations enshrined in the Convention). This lack of clarity on financial targets currently stands in the way of an agreement on the INDCs in Lima. With regard to adaptation, some developing countries have increasingly pointed to the need to include adaptation in INDCs. Including adaptation in INDCs could definitely strengthen the political standing of  adaptation. However, there is no need to apply the parameters for mitigation contributions, in terms of timing, ambition, comparability and obligation, to contributions for adaptation. Also, preparing adaptation contributions for the INDCs should not delay the delivery of agreement on mitigation contributions in the first quarter of 2015. The current UNFCCC draft text related to INDCs released on 11 November leaves everything open and at the same time lacks clarity.8 To accommodate some of the difficulties that have emerged, Parties could explicitly refer to a longer time frame for agreeing on adaptation contributions (e.g. into 2016 or 2017). A longer time frame could also allow countries to develop these contributions as part of ongoing efforts to develop national adaptation plans (including taking into account the level of warming expected from emissions reductions). Further, the UNFCCC Adaptation Committee could be instructed to provide technical support to help identify adequate national adaptation contributions, and to differentiate between actions which vulnerable countries can undertake independently, and those which require support. COP20 must deliver: · Significant progress on a draft negotiating text towards an ambitious, fair and legally binding 2015 agreement that includes the elements mentioned above. · A decision on the main parameters for INDCs (and the information which governments should submit) which allows a comprehensive equity review of post2020 mitigation pledges in the first half of 2015 with the aim of increasing ambition by COP21, and which encourages the presentation of national adaptation contributions. This must also trigger clarity on the approach to providing financial support for climate action (in particular for adaptation) to developing countries after 2020. 3. Gender equality: time for concerted action ahead of Paris Gender inequality is one of the most widespread and persistent barriers to securing a world of hope, tolerance and social justice. As one of the greatest injustices of our time, climate change amplifies the risks faced by people who are already poor and marginalised, with widespread and negative consequences primarily for women and girls, and for society as a whole. In CARE's view, tackling climate change and reducing gender inequality are not    optional extras. They lie at the core of building a fair and sustainable world and the enjoyment of human rights for all. Commendably, all 2015 climate policy frameworks have entry points for gender equality and empowering women and are now seeking to move action on gender forward. The proposal for the sustainable development goals contains a particularly noteworthy goal on gender equality and women's empowerment.9 Following COP18's landmark `Gender Decision'10, COP19 further strengthened the profile of gender in the context of the UNFCCC, although COP19 did not deliver a clear gender action plan as demanded, for example, by the Global Gender and Climate Alliance (GGCA), of which CARE is a member. However, the COP19 conclusions on gender and climate change, and the integration of gender aspects into several COP decisions, builds a basis for moving forward.11 For example, the Least Developed Countries Expert Group is currently finalising a publication on strengthening gender considerations in adaptation planning and implementation in Least Developed Countries.12 With regard to the new 2015 climate agreement, the revised ADP non-paper issued on 11 November contains stronger references than previously to gender (including in the preamble and the sections on adaptation, finance and capacity-building). This is welcome and provides a basis on which to build but will need strengthening.13 Thus, at a minimum, the following entry points should be used to strengthen gender equity further through COP20 decisions: · Including gender equality as a guiding principle for all climate action in the draft negotiation text for the 2015 agreement. · Strengthening gender equality in relevant guidelines for national planning, such as the guidelines for national adaptation plans. · Strengthening gender equality in guidance to institutions such as the Green Climate Fund (GCF), the Global Environment Facility (GEF), the Adaptation Fund (AF), the Adaptation Committee (AC) and the Warsaw Loss and Damage Mechanism, related to the integration of gender equality into their work14, and for the adoption of a comprehensive gender policy and action plan in 2015 in the GCF; · Advancing the monitoring of gender balance, gender budgeting and gender-sensitive climate policies and actions by Parties.  4. Climate finance: achieving USD100 billion by 2020 for climate action A report released recently by the Overseas Development Institute shows that more and more poor countries are investing significant domestic resources in adapting to climate change and preparing for climate-related disasters, despite urgent needs in other areas of poverty reduction and development.15 Investing in adaptation and disaster risk reduction is, of course, indispensable to safeguard development. But it is an extreme injustice that countries which have not caused the climate problem, but are particularly vulnerable to it, need to use their own scarce resources because developed countries provide low levels of climate finance. Developed countries mostly categorise climate finance as official development assistance (ODA). At the same time, many still fail to deliver on their promise of providing 0.7% of gross national income for ODA. This is only one indication of the failure of developed countries to adequately compensate for the impacts caused by past emissions. CARE's key priority is to ensure that funds for adaptation reach those who are most vulnerable in an equitable manner, and that climate finance overall does not exacerbate existing inequalities or undermine the livelihoods of people living in poverty. The pledge from developed countries to mobilise USD100 billion by 2020 for climate action in developing countries has unfortunately not led to a sufficiently strong shift towards more predictable and reliable public finance (as part of overall greater investment in climate action).16 The lack of ambition in climate finance remains a serious problem, creating mistrust and frustration among those fighting for more ambitious policies in developing countries. At COP20, the high-level ministerial meeting on long-term climate finance will be the critical forum for making political progress on defining clear pathways to securing USD100 billion. COP20 will also be important for making progress on other key areas, such as shifting investments away from fossil fuels to sustainable renewable energies and exchanging information on financial instruments to protect those most vulnerable to climate risks. In advance of COP20, there is a real opportunity for developed countries to regain lost trust, in particular by making pledges to the Green Climate Fund. In deciding to allocate 50% of its resources to adaptation, the GCF has taken a major, and positive, step away from current practice. What is needed now is enhanced focus on delivering adaptation resources to help meet the adaptation needs of the most vulnerable communities. UN officials set the benchmark for a successful start at USD10 billion in pledges. Many non-governmental organisations (NGOs) and developing countries asked for USD15 billion from developed countries as a first step. As of mid-November 2014, USD 7.5 billion has been pledged by a few countries, and a pledging conference to be held on 20 November will heap pressure on countries such as Norway, UK, Australia and Canada, who have not yet pledged anything, to make ambitious announcements. CARE also welcomes contributions to the GCF from countries around the world with growing economic capacity, such as South Korea and Mexico, which have already made pledges in a display of solidarity with countries acutely affected by climate change impacts, and poor communities. Pledging further resources to the UN Adaptation Fund (AF), which in contrast to the GCF is already fully operational, is also important. Achieving the AF's fundraising goal of USD80 million this year would have a strong strategic value, since it would give developing countries confidence that they can continue to use this fund which is already operational. In addition, governments will discuss technical issues on the finance agenda, for example, reports from the Standing Committee on Finance, and the review of financial institutions such as the Green Climate Fund, the Adaptation Fund and the Global Environment Facility.  Thus, CARE's main priorities at COP20 are for more financial and technical resources to be made available to promote low-emission and climate-resilient development in developing countries. In particular: · Developed countries must provide clarity on their plans to scale-up climate finance to USD100 billion (with most of the 100 bn coming from public finance). · Pledges must be made to the Green Climate Fund. They must add up to USD15 billion and contributions to the Adaptation Fund should reach at least USD80 million. · Commitments must be made to shift investments away from fossil fuels towards sustainable renewable energies. 5. Adaptation and Disaster Risk Reduction: strengthening support for vulnerable developing countries The scale of unfolding climate change impacts, and the disproportionate vulnerability of the populations who are least responsible for causing climate change, make a massive adaptation and disaster risk reduction (DRR) response both necessary and urgent. In CARE's view, as an organisation working with many vulnerable communities in adaptation practice, promoting community-based adaptation is of particular importance. It should incorporate interrelated strategies that include the promotion of climate-resilient livelihoods, DRR efforts to reduce the impact of hazards on vulnerable households, capacity development for local civil society and government institutions, and advocacy and social mobilisation to address the underlying causes of vulnerability.17 CARE has been actively engaged in UNFCCC work related to adaptation, the central forum on international cooperation on adaptation and for supporting vulnerable developing countries in their efforts to safeguard development in the face of climate change. Under the UNFCCC, national adaptation plans (NAPs) are an increasingly important tool to help developing countries prepare for expected climate impacts in the longer term. An increasing number of countries have now started to develop such plans, partially supported by the Global Environment Facility.18 From CARE's perspective it is crucial that the NAPs live up to the agreed principles, which include gender-sensitivity, and fully transparent and participatory approaches which take vulnerable communities into account. CARE is also part of a civil society consortium which aims to develop a more operational definition of key principles relevant to NAPs.19 The COP20 agenda includes a discussion on whether the guidelines for preparing NAPs approved in 2011 should be revised. Both submissions by Parties20, and the exchanges among many countries and stakeholders at the NAP Expo held in August 2014 indicate that there is too little experience to justify a full revision of the guidelines. However, a blind spot in the guidelines is the issue of assessing the level of financial support needed to carry out the actions contained in the plans, a notable gap. The costs of adaptation are expected to be huge. NAPs are expected to become the main instrument for providing information about national adaptation activities under the UNFCCC. It would therefore make sense to put a stronger focus on assessing financial needs for NAP implementation and related support. In light of the discussion on INDCs, it would also be useful to discuss how these guidelines can help countries identify potential national adaptation contributions. The Nairobi Work Programme on Impacts, Adaptation and Vulnerability (NWP) is an important instrument for furthering understanding among Parties and non-governmental stakeholders of expected impacts, adaptation options and the implications of vulnerability. The Bonn negotiation session in June agreed on the main activities for the next 2-year phase of the work programme. Activities include focusing on good practice and lessons learned in relation to  adaptation planning (including in relation to ecosystems, human settlements, water resources and health), and on processes and structures for linking national and local adaptation planning.21 With the agreement made in June, there is little left for the negotiation agenda in Lima. COP20 will also discuss the Adaptation Committee's report, the main institution involved in promoting a coherent approach to adaptation under the UNFCCC. The report includes recommendations related to monitoring and evaluation (M&E) of adaptation, collaboration among UNFCCC institutions and work on NAPs. Of particular importance to CARE are the recommendations of the Adaptation Committee that build on an expert meeting held jointly with the NWP on best practices and needs of local and indigenous communities which took place in April.22 One of the recommendations speaks to institutions funding adaptation ­ such as the Adaptation Fund, the Global Environment Fund and the Green Climate Fund ­ encouraging the integration of local, indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices into adaptation planning and practices, and M&E. In CARE's experience this is a key approach for delivering adaptation to those most in need, and the COP should push these bodies to take vulnerable communities into account.23 The Adaptation Committee also plans to undertake more work next year to promote effective finance for adaptation.24 An issue emerging from the negotiations on the 2015 agreement, but with potential relevance to both the Nairobi Work Programme and the Adaptation Committee, is the desire by some developing country Parties to advance the assessment and use of standardised metrics for assessing loss and damage, and also to make progress on benefits for adaptation actions.25 Progressing these issues could help to build a better basis for identifying the most effective approaches, which, however, always need to take local circumstances into account. So overall, and in addition to increasing climate finance, COP20 must strengthen adaptation and disaster risk reduction by: · Immediately increasing support for national adaptation planning in developing countries and strengthening NAP guidelines. · Promoting best practice in community-based and gender-equitable adaptation, building on local, indigenous and traditional knowledge and practices. · Considering how to advance the assessment and use of standardised metrics for adaptation.    6. Loss and Damage: COP20 must kick-start the international mechanism Typhoon Haiyan left a strong mark on delegates meeting at COP19 in Warsaw one year ago. Thousands of people died and millions more suffered, despite the Philippines investing considerable funds in disaster preparedness and adaptation. Rarely before has climate-related loss and damage been illustrated so clearly. In CARE's view, loss and damage is the residual impact of climate change resulting both from insufficient mitigation efforts and very real limits to adaptation. Fully addressing loss and damage is crucial from a human rights perspective. Much can be done to reduce loss and damage through adaptation and disaster risk reduction. But the limits to adaptation have also been recognised in the most recent IPCC report (see box 1). Limits to adaptation are generally breached when the expected increase in frequency or severity of catastrophic extreme events overwhelms the ability of countries to cope with damage, undermines their adaptive capacity and resilience and contributes to humanitarian disasters. Limits to adaptation are also breached with slow-onset impacts ­ sea level rise, increasing temperatures, ocean acidification, glacial retreat and related impacts, salinisation, land and forest degradation, loss of biodiversity and desertification ­ which, slowly or quickly, continue to develop and to which adaptation is in most cases impossible.26 For example, a recent study estimates that the impacts of unmitigated ocean acidification could represent a loss to the world economy of more than USD1 trillion annually by 2100.27 Vulnerable communities in the COP20 host country Peru are already experiencing loss and damage from glacial melting in the Andes (see box 2). With the establishment of the Warsaw International Mechanism (WIM) on Loss and Damage, COP19 achieved a landmark in addressing increasing loss and damage from climate impacts, despite the fact that it delivered little more than the bare minimum deemed acceptable by developing countries. Unfortunately, it also lacked reference to countries' historical responsibilities for causing climate change and a meaningful commitment to provide additional financial resources, including the resources to provide rehabilitation and compensation to those who experience loss and damage. Despite this, many developing countries have recently highlighted the importance of the loss and damage mechanism in the context of the negotiations on the 2015 agreement. The Least Developed Countries Group for example has called for specific international cooperation on insurance  and risk transfer systems, assistance and coordination related to climate change displacement, and they have proposed to set up a compensation regime in support of vulnerable developing countries.29 The Alliance of Small Island States (AOSIS) underlined the need to address loss and damage separately from adaptation and to anchor the mechanism in the 2015 agreement.30 Box 2 GLACIAL MELTING, ADAPTATION AND LOSS AND DAMAGE IN CENTRAL PERU Glacial melting is one of the most obvious consequences of climate change in Peru. Given the prospect of reduced water availability due to the rapid retreat of the Huayatapallana glacier, CARE is implementing a community-based adaptation project to expand cultivation of native potato and cereal (quinoa) varieties that require less water than the white potatoes and artichokes currently cultivated. The project also addresses the problem of malnutrition in the region as quinoa has much higher nutritional value than potato. However, as the glacier provides 500,000 people in the region with a significant proportion of their fresh water supply, and because the glacier is expected to completely disappear by 2030, the limits of adaptation and unavoidable loss and damage are foreseeable. The challenge posed by melting glaciers is multiplied across the Andes. Source: CARE International, 201428 At COP20, Parties will discuss the Loss and Damage Mechanism work plan for 2015-2016 based on the work of the Executive Committee in 2014.31 CARE has followed this work closely. Figure 2 presents CARE's understanding of the work plan's key elements in order to address loss and damage in vulnerable segments of the populations and particularly in vulnerable developing countries. The current draft of this plan in principle covers all of the main areas outlined in COP decisions (such as non-economic losses, migration and displacement, comprehensive risk management related to disasters etc., as illustrated in the blue boxes in figure 1). Work on financial instruments, knowledge generation and understanding, and addressing coordination needs can be regarded as cross cutting areas. In figure 1, the link between mitigation and loss and damage has been added in yellow since it is largely absent from the WIM work plan.   The weakest part of the plan is the section on finance, which focuses on "diffusion of information" related to financial instruments, and mostly noting examples of instruments which address disasters. However, the work plan should also assess and help developing financial instruments to address slow-onset changes in addition to disasters, which also should take into account financial approaches related to rehabilitation and compensation. Exactly when the Loss and Damage Mechanism will be in a position to clearly address the financial implications of loss and damage is still not clear. At COP20, Parties could however address some of the weaknesses in the Loss and Damage Mechanism work plan by providing additional guidance to the Executive Committee when it starts work. The guidance should include requesting the Executive Committee to take into account the different levels of  loss and damage that will result from varying levels of mitigation ambition and to address loss and damage from slow-onset events when considering financial instruments, as well as the underlying responsibilities for the emissions that are causing climate damage. It should also apply a rights-based approach and analysis across its activities. Finally, in addition to discussing the Loss and Damage Mechanism work plan, COP20 is expected to decide the composition of the Executive Committee, that is, the number of representatives, the country groups or bodies they represent and their mandate. Whatever is decided, those nominated should have a broad range of relevant expertise and include adequate representation from particularly vulnerable developing countries. The need for gender equality    in the composition of the committee should also be clearly stated. As initial meetings of the mechanism have indicated, the need to engage stakeholders should also be clear in the mandate. The proposal from several developing countries to establish a technical facility and a financial facility would be in line with previous decisions. Establishing such facilities would provide a basis for ensuring, over time, that the Loss and Damage Mechanism has the strength to deliver effectively, and have the ability to develop instruments to finance rehabilitation and compensation. Overall, COP20 must make progress on loss and damage by: · Adopting the Warsaw International Mechanism's 2-year work plan (with further guidance to strengthen finance, the link to the levels of expected warming and a rights-based approach), its modalities (including the set-up of a financial and a technical facility) and the composition of the mechanism's governance body. · Anchoring loss and damage in the 2015 agreement draft text. 7. Agriculture and forests: promoting equitable approaches for vulnerable populations The links between agriculture, food and nutrition security and climate change are gaining increased recognition, including in the IPCC's recent report (Box 1). At the same time, agriculture and land-use are major sources of greenhouse gas emissions. In CARE's view, there is a strong need to safeguard livelihoods, food and nutrition security, and the rights of small and marginalised farmers in the context of a changing climate. While agriculture should in general also contribute to reducing emissions, pressuring small and marginalised farmers to mitigate emissions is not acceptable, since the bulk of the emissions occur elsewhere. In recent years, the UNFCCC negotiations on agriculture have been controversial, mainly because of divergent views on the extent to which developing countries should be expected to take action on reducing greenhouse gas emissions. The term `climate-smart agriculture' has been the subject of much discussion and varying interpretations. The June negotiations in  Bonn eventually delivered an agreement among Parties, resulting de facto in a 2-year work programme under the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) which will focus on building climate resilience (see table 2). The work programme should also ensure an integrated approach that considers the impacts of climate change on livelihoods, food and nutrition security, and rights in national adaptation plans (NAPs) or as part of countries' nationally determined contributions (INDCs, see above). Table 2: Activities planned under the Subsidiary Body for Scientific and Technological Advice (SBSTA) agriculture work programme  Agricultural issues  Activities  Development of early warning systems and contingency plans in relation to extreme weather events and their effects, such as desertification, drought, floods, landslides, storm surges, soil erosion and saline water intrusion. Assessment of risk and vulnerability of agricultural systems to different climate change scenarios at regional, national and local levels, including but not limited to pests and diseases.  2015 Submissions by 25 March 2 in-session workshops June Workshop reports for COPIdentification of adaptation measures, taking into account the diversity of the agricultural systems, indigenous knowledge systems and differences in scale as well as possible co-benefits, and sharing experiences in research and development and on the ground activities, including socioeconomic, environmental and gender aspects.  2016 Submissions by 9 March 2 in-session workshops June Workshop reports for COPIdentification and assessment of agricultural practices and technologies to enhance productivity, food security and resilience in a sustainable manner, considering the differences in agroecological zones and farming systems, such as different grassland and cropland practices and systems. Source: Based on UNFCCC  Thus, it is unlikely that agriculture will receive much negotiation time in Lima, but will continue to play a role in future negotiations. Regarding forest conservation, COP19 concluded with a set of decisions which outlined the main parameters for promoting Reducing Emissions from Deforestation and Forest Degradation (REDD+). A key to the successful implementation of REDD+ is the system for providing information on how biodiversity, social and governance safeguards are addressed and respected. The UNFCCC decisions on REDD+ refer to the knowledge and rights of indigenous peoples and members of local communities, and take into account relevant international obligations, and the full and effective participation of relevant stakeholders. However, there is currently minimal guidance on implementing the system, particularly with regard to reporting safeguards. Without guidance on the timing, frequency and content of reports, there is a real risk that the system for information safeguards (SIS) will fail to ensure that safeguards are addressed and respected. Safeguarding information could become a periodic paper-based exercise masking  significant negative social and environmental impacts and jeopardising the conservation of forests. A number of developing country governments have outlined their initial experience in their submissions and provide suggestions about how to build up an SIS.34 This should serve as a basis for Parties to discuss further guidance on strengthening safeguards at COP20. In turn, this could help to reduce the risk of adverse impacts, including on local communities, and strengthen sustainable development co-benefits, including adaptation outcomes. However, a key challenge continues to be addressing the underlying drivers of deforestation, which cannot be captured through specific projects alone. More integrated action is required to address the drivers of deforestation at national and international levels. Therefore, the main priorities for COP20 are that Parties recognise the need to safeguard livelihoods, food and nutrition security, and the rights of small and marginalised farmers when taking action on climate change in the agricultural sector, and strengthen guidance on the application of safeguards and the associated information systems in REDD+.  