  Climate Analytics  Supporting science based policy to prevent dangerous  climate change enabling sustainable development  Summary  The Paris Agreement contains a long-term temperature goal (LTTG) of holding the  increase in the global average temperature to well below 2°C and pursuing efforts to limit  this to 1.5°C above preindustrial levels. The 1.5°C limit in the Paris Agreement goes  significantly further than the previous 2°C goal adopted under the UNFCCC. The Paris  Agreement also contains long-term global emissions goals to peak global emissions as  soon as possible and then reduce as rapidly as possible, according to the best available  science, to reach zero emissions globally in the second half of the 21st century.  The legally binding architecture of the agreement requires that countries must update and  increase the ambition of their nationally determined contributions (NDCs) on a common  five-year cycle following a five-yearly global stock take. The Paris Agreement obliges  countries to progressively increase their level of ambition and action, as reflected in their  NDCs, so as to meet the long term temperature goal of the agreement (Mace, 2016).  This report provides an overview of three important issues arising from the Paris  agreement:  • Benefits of the 1.5°C limit in the Paris Agreement in terms of avoided global and  national climate impacts and risks;  • The global emission pathways needed to meet the Paris agreement’s long-term  temperature goal, including the required timing of peak global emissions and of  zero global emissions;  • The remaining carbon budget consistent with the 1.5°C limit in the Paris Agreement.  The global emission pathway issues and carbon budget are particularly important, as in  order to fulfil its climate commitments under the Paris Agreement, Australia’s present and  future actions on emission reductions will need to fit within these limits. Australia's initial  nationally determined contribution (INDC) is inadequate even for the former 2°C goal1. At  present the overall globally aggregated effect of INDCs and current policies put the world  on a 3°C or close to 4oC pathways respectively2, much above the previous 2°C limit. The  first review, or stock take, of the aggregate effect of all INDC commitments that countries  have put forward in relation to the 1.5°C limit in the Paris Agreement and the long term  global emission goals will occur in 2018 as part of facilitative dialogue agreed in Paris. The  2018 facilitative dialogue process will be informed by a specifically requested IPCC Special  Report on 1.5°C impacts and on how to close the gap between current policies, NDCs and  emission pathways consistent with the Paris Agreement in 2025 and 2030. Based on this,  by 2020 at the latest governments need to submit updated NDCs for 2025 and 2030 that  effectively close this gap. There is therefore an expectation that Australia improves its  emission reductions pledge to be consistent with the Paris Agreement and its enabling  decisions3. The government's 2017 review of climate policies and its promised  consideration of long term targets provides an important opportunity for strengthening  such commitments. The 2018 stocktake will be another crucial opportunity.  Limiting warming to 1.5°C provides key benefits compared to a 2°C limit  At present global warming is about 1°C above preindustrial levels. The world is already  experiencing substantial impacts and damages, including for agriculture, human  livelihoods and natural systems such as the Great Barrier Reef. Concerns that sustained  global warming of 2°C above pre-industrial would lead to very large impacts, damages and  risks led many vulnerable countries to express concern that the former 2°C limit was too  unsafe. These and other concerns led the world to adopt the Paris Agreement’s long-term  temperature goal, which includes a 1.5°C limit, as opposed to the earlier 2°C goal adopted  by the international community. Why has this come about?  Recent scientific literature shows that there is a significant increase in impacts and risks as  global-mean warming moves from 1.5°C to 2°C above pre-industrial levels. This seemingly  small difference in global average temperature represents a large addition of energy into  the global climate system and turns out to carry large consequences.  If the world warms by 1.5°C, currently rare climate related extremes (extreme heatwaves,  unusual dry spells, extreme rainfall, massive global coral bleaching events) would become  the new normal. If global mean warming were to reach 2°C, the climate system would  move into uncharted territory. For example, in a world that is 2°C warmer than preindustrial  levels, the typical annual length of warm spells would be up to 60 days longer  than today across northern parts of Australia and around 20 days longer across central  and southern regions. This increase would be reduced by at least 30%, if global warming is  limited to 1.5°C.  The 1.5°C limit would mean smaller increases in temperature of the annual hottest days,  reduced impacts on water availability and a smaller increases in length of dry spells, in  particular across southern, south-western and mid-western parts of Australia.  In light of the 2014-2016 massive global coral bleaching event (Eakin et al., 2016) that has  drastically affected the Great Barrier Reef4, it is especially critical to note that limiting  global warming to 1.5°C offers some chance for a fraction of the world’s coral reefs to  survive, while 2°C would provide very limited chance, if any at all.  Global sea level rise at 1.5°C warming would reach 40 cm above current levels by 2100,  compared to 50 cm at 2°C. However this does not take into account the longer-term post-  2100 commitment to further sea level rise, nor does it include the risk of crossing a  threshold to irreversible melt of parts of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets, with  multi-metre sea level rise as a consequence. This risk is estimated to be much lower at  1.5°C than at 2°C.  In summary the difference between 1.5°C and 2°C marks the difference between the  upper end of present day climate variability and a new climatic regime of temperature and  water related extremes. In a country already experiencing temperatures exceeding 40°C in  its urban centres this is a very serious reason for concern for human health (Smith et al.,  2014). Along with a substantial drying trend projected in particular for southern part of  Australia this will negatively affect agricultural productivity (Reisinger et al., 2014) as well  as lead to increased risks of forest fires (Pitman, Narisma, & McAneney, 2007). Risks  under a 1.5°C warming would still be substantial but would alleviate several of the most  profound risks for coral reef degradation, extreme temperatures and drying projected for  2°C.  With early action, global emission reductions needed to meet the 1.5°C limit are  technically and economically feasible  Limiting warming to below 1.5°C requires qualitatively similar transformations in the  production and use of energy to those needed to hold warming below 2°C, however the  decarbonisation of the energy system needs to be faster and more pronounced.  For 1.5°C scenarios, zero CO2 emissions globally are needed by about 2050, and about ten  years later for 2°C scenarios, with global emissions peaking no later than about 2020  before rapidly declining.  For the world to get onto a 1.5°C pathway, the first and most urgent measures include the  rapid scaling up of renewable energy systems, energy efficiency, electrification of  transport systems, and improvements of industrial and building efficiency. Increased  energy efficiency at all levels is needed to reduce the growth in primary energy demand,    and renewables and other low-carbon energy systems are needed to decarbonise the  primary energy supply system rapidly.  Globally, the direct mitigation costs of 1.5°C scenarios are about 1.5-2 times higher over  the whole of the 21st century than the former 2°C goal, but as noted above the benefits  are vast.  Any global temperature limit is associated with a carbon budget - the allowed total of  global cumulative CO2 emissions in order to meet a given global warming goal. Historical  emissions to date and high levels of atmospheric CO2 concentrations at present (above  400 ppm CO2) mean that the remaining greenhouse gas (GHG) and carbon budgets are  very small. Limiting warming to 1.5°C (or 2°C) therefore now requires introducing negative  CO2 emissions at a small scale in the 2030s and scaling up thereafter. In addition,  sequestration of carbon in biological reservoirs, such as forests and soils, will also be  needed. The need for negative emission technologies by itself is not a differentiating  element between the 1.5°C limit and the previous 2°C limit.  This situation means that in the longer term (post 2030) technologies to remove CO2 from  the atmosphere play a key role, even with very rapid GHG reductions in the next 10 to 15  years. The scientific literature on emission pathways points to bioenergy with carbon  capture and storage (BECCS) as the most viable option at present (The Climate Institute,  2014), with the potential for large-scale deployment at limited economic costs. The  literature and models generally include considerations of interrelated land use issues,  such as food production, bioenergy, afforestation and reforestation. While BECCS will not  be without significant challenges (Fuss et al. 2014) with technological, sustainability,  social, political, and legal dimensions, this technology has the unique capability of  removing CO2 from the atmosphere and supplying energy at the same time.  Introduction  One of the outcomes of the 2009 climate summit in Copenhagen (COP15) was an  agreement on a goal to hold warming below a 2°C increase above pre-industrial. However,  at Copenhagen more than 100 vulnerable countries were calling for limiting warming to  below 1.5°C. Recognising this, during the subsequent climate summit in Cancun (COP16) in  2010, the UNFCCC established a review process to evaluate whether the long-term global  temperature goal of holding warming below 2°C was adequate to avoid dangerous climate  change, and whether good progress was made towards achieving the long-term goal. The  review process focused in particular on the differences in impacts between 1.5°C and 2°C  warming above pre-industrial levels. This process ended in 2015 with the final report of its  scientific arm (a “Structured Expert Dialogue”) concluding that a warming of 2°C cannot be  considered safe and that 1.5°C is closer to being a safe ‘guardrail’ (UNFCCC, 2015).  This very important finding was reflected in the long-term temperature goal of the Paris  Agreement of holding the increase in the global average temperature well below 2°C and  pursuing efforts to limit this increase to 1.5°C above preindustrial levels. In Paris at COP21  Australia supported the inclusion of the 1.5°C limit in the Paris Agreement long termtemperature  goal.  On April 22nd 2016 in New York, Australia joined more than 170 other nations in signing  the Paris Agreement to deal with the global climate change problem and pledged to ratify  it in 2016. As the Australian government prepares to ratify the Paris Agreement, thus  committing itself to fulfil the obligations it entails, Australia’s emission reductions and  other actions need to be assessed in light of their compatibility with the Paris Agreement  temperature goal and other elements of the Agreement. The analysis in this paper  outlines the global emission envelope within which this assessment needs to take place in  order to meet the obligations of the Paris Agreement.  Comparison of climate impacts between  a 1.5°C and a 2°C world  Already with an observed warming of around 1°C, the impacts of anthropogenic climate  change are felt globally. Temperatures and sea level are on the rise (IPCC, 2013), extreme  weather events are increasing in intensity and frequency (IPCC, 2012), with largely  detrimental effects on global agriculture (Lesk, Rowhani, & Ramankutty, 2016; Porter et  al., 2014) and atmospheric CO2 levels are highest in millions of years, leading to gradually  worsening ocean acidification (IPCC, 2014). Severe impacts on marine life, including  erosion and mass bleaching of tropical coral reefs, are the consequence of already    observed ocean acidification and increasing temperatures (J.- P. Gattuso et al., 2015).  During the 2015-2016 El Niño event, mass bleaching has affected vast parts of the Great  Barrier Reef (Normille, 2016). In addition, there is growing evidence that parts of the West  Antarctic ice sheet, a “tipping element” of the Earth System (Lenton et al., 2008), may  already be in irreversible retreat, implying additional sea level rise of at least one meter  over centuries to come (Feldmann & Levermann, 2015; Joughin, Smith, & Medley, 2014;  Rignot, Mouginot, Morlighem, Seroussi, & Scheuchl, 2014).  Ocean, cryosphere and global sea level rise  As explained below, physical impacts on oceans and the cryosphere (Antarctic and  Greenland ice sheets, small icecaps and mountain glaciers) differ considerably between  1.5°C and 2°C warming in relation to both gradual impacts and to the risk of abrupt shifts  of so-called “tipping elements” (Lenton et al., 2008). Tipping elements in the Earth System  are characterised by internal self-amplifying dynamics that may lead to a complete change  in its state. Such dynamics are triggered above a certain global mean temperature  increase, or the tipping point.  A recent study analysing tipping elements in the Earth System, including ocean circulation  and sea ice patterns in climate models, found that 2°C warming would already cross about  50% of all tipping points identified in these models for any level of warming (Drijfhout et  al., 2015). This number is reduced to about 20% if warming is limited to 1.5°C. Besides  those associated with sea level rise, other tipping elements assessed include large-scale  forest dieback of the Amazon and boreal (high latitude) forests, permafrost collapse,  vegetation shifts in Africa’s Eastern Sahel region, and disappearance of Arctic sea ice.  Most relevant for this section are potential tipping points for large scale ice sheet  disintegration of the Antarctic and Greenland ice sheets. The West Antarctic (Feldmann &  Levermann, 2015) as well as parts of the East Antarctic ice sheet (Mengel & Levermann,  2014) are at substantial risk of disintegration due to ocean-ice sheet interactions. This  could result in additional sea level rise of 6-8 meters over time scales of several centuries  to millennia (Deconto & Pollard, 2016). Although oceanic warming around Antarctica is  projected to increase with increasing global warming (Hellmer, Kauker, Timmermann,  Determann, & Rae, 2012), our current understanding of these changes does not allow for  a quantification of the precise levels of global mean temperature increase to which the  potential tipping points can be linked.  The Greenland ice sheet is more directly vulnerable to increases in atmospheric  temperatures and researchers have identified 1.6°C warming as the best estimate for a  critical threshold for a tipping of the Greenland ice sheet (Robinson, Calov, & Ganopolski,  2012). A disintegration of the Greenland ice sheet could lead to up to 7 m sea level rise    over thousands of years. Assessments of past sea level evidence from earth history and  state-of-the-art modelling results indicate an average multi-millennial average sea level  rise of about 2.3 m per °C of warming (Levermann et al., 2013).  Projections for 21st century sea level rise are displayed in Figure 1 (Schleussner et al.,  2016). The best estimate for 21st century sea level rise under a 2°C scenario is about 50  cm, which is 10 cm less under a 1.5°C scenario. Possibly even more important are the  rates of sea level rise in 2100, as they will largely influence a post-2100 commitment to  long-term sea level rise. Only under a 1.5°C scenario are these rates in decline by 2100,  reaching present day levels by that time. Note, however, that these assessments do not  account yet for the effect of potential rapid ice sheet disintegration discussed above, nor  do they identify vulnerabilities related to different rates of rise regionally or increases in  sea level variability that may be influenced by global warming (Widlansky, Timmermann,  & Cai, 2015).  Tropical coral reefs  Tropical coral reefs are particularly vulnerable to climate change. They are threatened by  ocean acidification (Pandolfi et al., 2003) and intense coral bleaching as a result of oceanic  warming (Meissner, Lippmann, & Sen Gupta, 2012). Figure 2 displays the fraction of global  tropical coral reefs projected to be at risk of long-term degradation, understood as an  eventual loss of the reef ecosystem, due to severe bleaching events occurring at least  Figure 1: Probabilistic projections of global sea level rise relative to 1986-2005 levels (lower panels) for  a 1.5°C temperature scenario (left) and a 2°C scenario (right panels). Thick lines indicate median  estimates whereas dark coloured ranges indicate the 66% likelihood range and light coloured ranges  the 90% likelihood range. Median estimates for 2100 sea level rise under 1.5°C is about 10cm less than  the 50cm projected for 2°C. From Schleussner et al. (2016).    every five years for 1.5°C and 2°C. Unless extremely optimistic scenarios of coral reef  adaptation are assumed, virtually all tropical coral reefs will be at severe risk of  degradation under 2°C warming. The warming difference between 1.5°C and 2°C is likely  to be decisive for the future survival of tropical coral reefs and only the 1.5°C scenario  offers some potential for these ecosystems to adapt. The already observed coral bleaching  illustrates the magnitude and scale of this risk for the Great Barrier Reef, a World Heritage  site, that has already lost more than 50% of its coral cover since 1985 (Gattuso, Hoegh-  Guldberg, & Pörtner, 2014). This loss will have widespread and detrimental consequences  for livelihoods of communities depending on it. Coral reefs provide coastal protection,  account for more than 10% of fish caught in tropical countries (20% of developing  countries) and the Great Barrier Reef itself generates about A$ 5.4 billion in tourism  revenue annually to the Australian economy (Gattuso et al., 2014).  Figure 2: Probabilistic projections of the share of global ocean grid cells with tropical  coral reefs at risk of long-term degradation under a 1.5°C scenario (top) and a 2°C  scenario (bottom, for the temperature trajectories, see (Schleussner et al., 2016). This  is assessed over all ocean grid cells currently containing coral reefs. The figure  displays the share for assumptions about future evolution of temperature resilience  of coral reefs. Whereas the “Constant”-case assumes observed levels of coral  susceptibility to increased water temperatures, the “Thermal Adaptation” case  assumes unprecedented and rapid adaptation of these ecosystems. As this appears to  be very optimistic given the detrimental effects of ocean acidification to tropical coral  reef calcification rates (thereby weakening these systems considerably), these  projections represent the absolute lower bound of future tropical coral reef risk. From  Schleussner et al. (2016).    Impacts of 1.5°C and 2°C warming on Australia  Australia is exposed to climate change impacts, including sea level rise and coral reef loss,  but also to extreme weather events and drying trends (Reisinger et al., 2014). The analysis  below builds on a recent global study that investigated differences between 1.5°C and 2°C  warming for a range of climate indicators (Schleussner et al., 2016).  Extreme Weather Events  In recent years the world has experienced a profound increase in frequency and intensity  of extreme weather events due to anthropogenic climate change (IPCC, 2012). Described  below are the results for four different extreme weather event indicators: extreme  temperature, warm spells, dry spells (meteorological droughts) and extreme precipitation  (Zhang et al., 2011):  • Intensity of hot extremes (TXx): How much hotter would the hottest day in a year become?  The indicator used here is the annual maximum value of daily maximum temperature. This is a  good indicator for the increase in extreme high temperatures.  • Warm spell duration indicator (WSDI): How much longer would a currently typical series of hot  days become? The indicator here is the annual count of the longest consecutive period in which  the daily maximum temperature for each day exceeds the 90% quantile for this day over the  reference period. The minimum length is six consecutive days. This is a good indicator for heatwaves  occurrence.  • Dry spell length or consecutive dry days (CDD): How much longer would dry periods become?  The indicator here is the maximum number of consecutive days for which the precipitation is  below 1 mm per day in a year. This is a good indicator for meteorological drought.  • Heavy precipitation intensity (RX5day): How much heavier would heavy rainfall periods  become? The indicator here is the annual maximum of rainfall over a consecutive 5-day period.  This is a good indicator for flooding risk.  The analysis has been performed on ensembles of state-of-the-art climate models from  the fifth Climate Model Intercomparison Project (CMIP5, 11 models for temperature  extremes, 14 models for precipitation extremes; for more information about the  methodology see (Schleussner et al., 2016)). The model median results for each of these  indicators are displayed in Figure 3 for 1.5°C and 2°C warming, as well as the difference  between the two warming levels.  A warming of 2°C would imply a substantial increase in temperature related extremes:  annual extreme temperatures would exceed 3°C above values typically experienced during  the recent past (1986-2005) and the annual mean length of warm spells (also relative to  the 1986-2005 period) would last around 20 days for central and southern part of  Australia and up to 60 days in the northern part of Australia.  Under 1.5°C warming, this increase in intensity and length of extreme temperature events  is less pronounced compared to 2°C. Increase in the intensity of annual hot extremes (TXx)    would be limited to about 2°C above the 1986-2005 reference period and warm spells  would be up to 15 days for the central and southern parts of Australia and up to about  30-40 days for the northern part of Australia.  Note that the extreme increases indicated in the northern part of Australia and coastal  grid-cells arise from the fact that most of the underlying grid cells contain dominantly  ocean and not land. This could be overcome by downscaling global climate model results  for these regions to achieve higher resolution, e.g. in a dynamical downscaling approach  (Australian Bureau of Meteorology and Commonwealth Scientific and Industrial Research  Organisation (CSIRO), 2011). As natural temperature variability over the oceans is much  smaller than over land, the resulting increase in warm spell duration, an extreme event  index developed for land, is particularly pronounced and should be interpreted with  caution.  Figure 3: Projections for changes in extreme weather event indicators relative to the  1986-2005 reference period. Grey marked areas indicate regions, where less than 66% of  the models in the ensemble investigated agree on the sign of change.    Projections for precipitation-related indices indicate substantial uncertainty in future  changes of precipitation-related extremes, for both extreme wet and dry events (grey  areas in Figure 3). However, significant differences exist in particular related to extreme  precipitation events in the northern part of Australia that are projected to intensify by 7-  10% compared to less than 5% under a 1.5°C warming. In spite of such heavier rainfall  events, a robust increase in drying is projected for large parts of Australia under a 2°C  warming. The currently longest annual dry spell would become up to 2 weeks longer  (compare Figure 3, bottom panel). The difference between 1.5°C and 2°C in the length of  dry spells is particularly pronounced in the southern, south-western and mid-western  parts of Australia. An overview of this comparison of changes in extreme events at 1.5°C  and 2°C are given in  Table 1.  Water availability  In addition to changes in extreme weather events, Australia is particularly prone to longterm  drying trends. Here, we analyse changes in annual water availability (total runoff,  Qtot) based on the climate impact model intercomparison project ISI-MIP (Schewe et al.,  2014). The projections presented are based on 5 bias-corrected climate projections with  state-of-the-art climate models and 11 hydrological models comprising, in total, a model  ensemble of 55 models.  Under a 1.5°C scenario, we find a reduction in annual water availability of about 10% for  most parts of Australia, with reduction in annual water availability in western parts of  Australia exceeding 15% (Figure 4). Under 2°C, water availability is projected to continue  to decrease across the southern half of the continent and is most pronounced in the  south-eastern and south-western and Pilbara regions. Reductions exceed 20% for western  parts of Australia. In the northern third of the continent our results indicate a reversal in  the projected trend towards a slight wetting, probably related to monsoon intensification.  It is, however, important to underscore that these projections are uncertain and even  reductions exceeding 40% (30%) are still within the ‘likely’ (66% probability) range of  projections for a 2°C (1.5°C) warming.  Table 1: Changes in temperature and precipitation related extreme event indices projected at 1.5°C and 2°C  warming from Schleussner et al. (2016). The median change experienced by 50% of the land-area is given for  the northern part of Australia (North of 30°S) and the southern part Australia (South of 30°C and including  Tasmania and New Zealand). The likely range over the model ensemble (66% likelihood) is indicated in  square brackets. Changes in WSDI are expressed in days and RX5day, CDD, as well as Qtot in % change. All  changes are assessed relative to the 1986-2005 reference period.      Comparison of global mitigation  pathways between a 1.5°C and a 2°C  world  Integrated Assessment Models of Climate Change (IAMs) provide information on the  complex interrelation between the economy, energy use and the global climate. Some of  the most important insights IAMs offer at a system level relate to the energy system  transformation necessary for achieving a specific climate target – such as limiting global  mean temperature increase to 1.5°C or hold warming below 2°C above preindustrial  levels. Energy system transformation means, in essence, a shift away from the reliance on  fossil fuels, towards renewables on the energy supply side, combined with energy  efficiency improvements on the demand side. IAMs provide estimates of the direct cost of  climate change mitigation, compared to a baseline scenario without climate policy. Much  research shows that these direct mitigation costs are expected to be partially, or fully  balanced by the benefits of mitigation, in particular economic co-benefits of mitigation  (e.g. reduced air pollution effects on human health and agriculture due to reduced use of  fossil fuels) and avoided climate change. IAMs in general do not account for co-benefits  or damages from climate change.  The energy system transformations necessary to limit warming to less than either 1.5°C or  2°C are very similar, but deployment of low, zero and negative carbon energy supply  options needs to happen faster in the 1.5°C limit case so that emission reduction can be  realised earlier (Rogelj, Luderer, et al., 2015; Schaeffer et al., n.d.). This is associated with  1.5-2 times higher costs over the century as a whole, with costs higher in the next few  decades, rather than later in the century (Rogelj, Luderer, et al. 2015).  Baseline, 1.5°C and 2°C scenarios  This section assesses global total CO2 and GHG emissions for three scenarios from the  MESSAGE model5 (base, 1.5°C and 2°C) and compares these for GHGs with historical data  and two projections of the effects of current policies (CAT high and CAT low) from the  Climate Action Tracker (CAT). The CAT high and CAT low scenarios describe the range of  emission pathways that can be expected to result from a continuation of current climate  policies, in a bottom-up global aggregation of country-level assessments. It is important  to note that an assessment of the effects reductions pledges and INDCs (Intended  Nationally Determined Contributions) that countries put forward in 2015 during the Paris  Agreement negotiations result in most cases in lower emissions than current policies.  In the MESSAGE baseline scenario, no global temperature goal is assumed.  To characterise policies consistent with the 2°C goal adopted in the Copenhagen Accords  in 2009 we draw from existing emissions pathways that hold the increase in global  average temperature below 2°C with at least a likely probability (>66%). At present most  emission pathways that come close to the 1.5°C limit, exceed an increase of 1.5°C above  pre-industrial levels during the 21st century, before dropping to the 1.5°C limit by 2100. In  this study we have used one of the lowest scenarios available that limit warming to 1.5°C  by 2100 with a probability of more than 50 % (and holds warming below 2oC with about an  85% probability). This should not be seen as an interpretation of the 1.5°C limit in the  Paris Agreement. A new generation of scenarios are being developed which may not  exceed 1.5°C, however these were not yet available for this report.  Probabilities of staying below the given warming threshold are computed using the  reduced complexity global climate-carbon cycle model MAGICC (Meinshausen, Raper, &  Wigley, 2011), in the same methodology as was applied for IPCC’s Fifth Assessment  Report, and accounts for uncertainties in important climate-related parameters – e.g.  climate sensitivity and carbon–cycle characteristics – by returning probabilistic  temperature responses.  The MESSAGE scenarios were taken from an ensemble of scenarios used in peer-reviewed  publications (Rogelj, McCollum, Reisinger, Meinshausen, & Riahi, 2013; Rogelj, Mccollum,  & Riahi, 2013) and selected for their inter-scenario comparability:  • Scenarios share the same assumptions regarding substantial improvements in energy  efficiency – energy demand is comparatively low already in the baseline scenario. In the  short to medium term, GHG emissions are well in line with the current policy CAT low  scenario, which gives the lower estimate of global emissions for a world in which currently  (2015) implemented climate policies where continued. This would lead to about 3.3°C of  global warming until 21006 and in the long term tend to be considerably higher than this.  Global warming resulting from such a baseline can therefore be considered to be well above  3.3°C in 2100.  • Climate policy fully compatible with the respective temperature goals only begins from 2020  in these scenarios. This is in line with the current state of affairs regarding climate policy.  Accelerated policies leading to higher mitigation pre-2020 remain feasible and would result  in slightly lower rates of reduction post 2020 required to still achieve the long-term  temperature goal.  The MESSAGE baseline scenario, which assumes the absence of global climate policy to  limit warming to any certain level, shows a decline in CO2 emissions towards the end of    the century. This is mainly due to assumed constraints in fossil fuel availability at  prices/cost that can compete with projected decreasing prices for renewable energy  supply, however by that time warming has reached around 3.5°C.Table 2 shows relative  changes in global CO2 and GHG emissions levels in 2030 and 2050, relative to 2005 levels,  and per capita emissions levels. This emphasises again the need for global zero CO2  emissions and major reductions in GHG emissions by around 2050 in order to limit  warming to 1.5°C. It also shows the vast discrepancy between the goals laid out in the  Paris Agreement and what countries around the world are currently doing – the latter can  be seen for GHG emissions in the CAT high and low scenarios. Also, the MESSAGE baseline  scenario assumes a more optimistic development compared to the CAT high scenario and  is relatively close to the CAT low scenario.    1) The CAT global assessment () does not specify global population data. Therefore, the  Medium scenario from the United Nations World Population prospects 2015 () was used for global  population numbers in 2030 and 2050. Given the long-term emission pathways of CAT are derived from IPCC Fifth Assessment Report  scenarios, which are also often associated with UN population projections, this is a reasonable approach, but it must be noted that  population projections are highly uncertain and alternative assumptions would give different per-capita emission values.  2)CAT global assessment considers only total GHGs. Therefore, no CO2 could be computed.  Global emission reductions for the Paris Agreement  With climate policy in place, total GHG emissions (the sum of CO2 emissions and global  warming potential (GWP)7 weighted non-CO2 GHG emissions) need to decline rapidly to  reach globally aggregated zero emissions and then become negative in the latter part of  the 21st century. Negative total GHGs emissions result from negative CO2 emissions  outweighing the remaining non-CO2 GHG emissions: CO2 emissions need to become  negative shortly after 2060 in the 2°C scenarios and around 2050 in the 1.5°C scenarios  (Figure 5)8.  Table 3 shows the remaining budgets until the end of the 21st century, for both of the  climate policy scenarios and as an indication of the overall mitigation efforts, also for the  baseline. The so called threshold avoidance budgets (Rogelj et al., 2016) in the last two  columns are the cumulative CO2 or GHG emissions between 2015 and 2100 that limit the  global temperature increase by 2100 to below a certain value with a given probability  (66% for 2°C, 50% for 1.5°C). As mentioned above, key climate-system uncertainties are  included in these probability estimates, such as uncertainties in climate sensitivity and  carbon–cycle characteristics. In addition, the ranges drawn from the literature are  provided to put the scenarios central in this report in context, indicating some of the  uncertainties related to, for example, relative costs of technologies across models, early vs  late reductions, CO2 vs non-CO2 reductions etc.  Carbon budget  Compared to the baseline scenario, cumulative emissions of over 3000 Gt CO2 need to be  avoided to hold warming below 2°C. For the 1.5°C by 2100 scenarios, this number rises to  nearly 3500 GtCO2 to be avoided.  Put another way, the remaining global carbon budget for the 1.5oC over the period 2015-  2100 scenario is less than 250 GtCO2 (245 GtCO2). It is critical to understand that this is  net budget over the century as the 1.5°C by 2100 scenario emits 775 GtCO2 from 2015-  2050 and then with negative emissions technologies and biological carbon sequestration  take 530 GtCO2 out of the atmosphere from 2051-2100.  Both the speed and the overall degree of mitigation are less pronounced for total GHGs.  Whilst it is generally understood that the emission reduction possibilities from non-CO2  GHG emissions are not as great as from CO2 emissions from the energy system, it is also  clear that there remains a substantial degree of uncertainty about the ability to reduce  emissions in these areas. Different IAM models assume very different emission reduction  possibilities (Gernaat et al., 2015), and this issue is reflected by the ranges included in the  table. If reduction possibilities for non-CO2 GHGs are greater than assumed then  corresponding CO2 budgets are higher, and vice versa (Rogelj, Reisinger, et al., 2015).  An advantage of illustrating budgets using a single model framework is the robust likewith-  like comparison between the scenarios, because any change in certain assumed  model parameters like, for instance, technology specific investment cost will always affect  all scenarios and therefore shift the results of all scenarios – this is the so called baselin-eeffect.  Table 3: Year of globally zero emissions (approximate) and emissions budgets, Sources: IPCC AR5, UNEP Emissions Gap  Report (2014), IIASA (Rogelj et al 2015; 2016), own calculations.  1) Year of zero emissions as reported in UNEP Emissions Gap Report 2014 based on re-analysis of IPCC AR5 emissions  scenarios that reach 2020 global GHG emissions levels consistent with INDC analysis.  2) CO2 budgets in IPCC AR5 WGIII are for 2011 onwards, hence adjusted here by subtracting 160 GtCO2 of past emissions  2011-2015 (Rogelj et al 2016) – the IPCC AR5 scenario database includes many scenarios that reach 2020 global GHG  emissions levels considerably below levels consistent with NDCs and hence the CO2 budgets reported for AR5 amount  typically to lower levels of total cumulative emissions in the 2016-2050 period than the scenarios selected for detailed  analysis in this report. IPCC AR5 did not report budgets for total GHGs, nor for the 2051-2100 period.  3) Re-analysis of scenario data from UNEP Emissions Gap Report 2014 based on Rogelj et al (2015). UNEP EGR did not  report budgets for total GHGs  Need for negative CO2 emissions  IAM findings currently point to the need for large-scale carbon uptake activities and  negative emission technologies to achieve these climate goals. Major contributions in  existing scenarios to carbon uptake (sequestering in biological carbon reservoirs) come  from afforestation & reforestation. Negative CO2 emissions in the present generation of  IAM models derive from technologies combining bioenergy with carbon capture and  storage (BECCS) (Gough & Upham, 2011) which uses biomass to fuel thermal power  plants for provision of electricity and then stores the CO2 from the combustion  underground, and at this stage is identified in the scientific literature as the most likely  available negative emissions option with potential to grow to large-scale deployment at  limited economic costs.  Like most other IAMs of the current model generation, the MESSAGE model includes a  coherent representation of the land-use sector and biomass availability, approximately  considering inter-related land use issues, such as food production, bioenergy,  afforestation and reforestation. In parallel to negative emissions through BECCS, the low  emission scenarios from MESSAGE also include sequestration through afforestation and  reforestation, reaching cumulative sequestration of around 220-230 GtCO2 by the end of  the century in the Paris Agreement 1.5°C and Cancun Agreements 2°C scenarios. While  BECCS will not be without its challenges (Fuss et al., 2014) with technological,  sustainability, social, political, legal and legislative dimensions, it has the unique capability  of removing CO2 from the atmosphere while at the same time supplying energy.  BECCS is a combination of already known technologies – thermal power plants fired with  biofuel, capture of CO2 from the combustion gases and then transport and storage in  secure geological formations (Metz, Davidson, de Coninck, Loos, & Meyer, 2005), but has  not yet been deployed on a large scale (Gough & Upham, 2011). BECCS can be  categorised as a negative emissions technology because it extracts CO2 from the air as an  integral part of an energy production system. Plants take up and store carbon during  growth through photosynthesis. When either forest & agricultural residues, or dedicated  bioenergy crops, are harvested and combusted in power plants, and the resulting CO2  emissions are captured and stored underground, this results in a net extraction of CO2  from the atmosphere, while providing energy services.  Another option for negative emissions is direct air capture (DAC) (Broehm, Strefler, &  Bauer, 2015), where CO2 is extracted from ambient or near ambient atmospheric  concentrations and stored in a geological reservoir. The economic costs of this are  estimated to be far greater than BECCS (McLaren, 2011), which is why this option at this  stage does not generally play a role in IAM scenarios. DAC has the advantage that it is  limited only by the amount of energy and storage available, and not also by the amount of  land that is required as with BECCS.  As is the case with direct air capture, other means of taking CO2 from the air and  sequestering in biological carbon reservoirs, including reforestation, afforestation and  increased CO2 uptake by soils, do not supply the additional benefit of energy output. Some  of these may, however, provide other services, such as water basin management, or soil  improvements. Land use objective conflicts can also arise where a priority on carbon  storage in forests may conflict with biodiversity, water management, cultural and land  scape values, as is the case with bioenergy systems. As mentioned above, in most of the  scenarios for limiting warming to below 2°C and 1.5°C significant carbon sequestration in    the terrestrial biosphere is assumed, and negative CO2 emissions from industrial processes  such as BECCS are required in addition to this.  Discussion and Conclusions  Recent scientific developments show that there are considerable benefits to limiting  warming increase to 1.5°C compared to 2°C. The difference in global mean temperature  increase between 1.5°C and 2°C has substantial implications for key climate impacts and  indicators for Australia. Projections of future coral bleaching indicate that the 0.5°C  temperature difference might be decisive for the survival of the coral reefs worldwide and  in particular the Great Barrier Reef (Frieler et al., 2012). Recent in situ and modelling  results of the thermal tolerance of reef-building corals in the Great Barrier Reef has shown  that this protective mechanism is likely to be lost under warming scenarios exceeding  1.5°C, further amplifying the degradation risk of the system (Ainsworth et al., 2016). This  concern is further reinforced by the recent estimation that unabated warming is likely to  render the recent extreme temperature anomalies that prevailed during March 2016 as  new normal temperatures in the Coral Sea region covering the northern sectors of the  Great Barrier Reef by the mid-2030s.  As demonstrated in this report, the difference between 1.5°C and 2°C marks the  difference between the upper end of present day climate variability and a new climatic  regime in relation to temperature and water related extremes. In a country already  experiencing temperatures exceeding 40°C in its urban centres, this is a very serious  reason for concern for human health as well as labour productivity (Smith et al., 2014). In  combination with a substantial drying trend projected in particular for southern Australia  and in particular the South-West Land Division of Western Australia, this will negatively  affect agricultural productivity (Reisinger et al., 2014) as well as lead to increased risks of  grassland and forest fires (Pitman et al., 2007). Risks under a 1.5°C warming would still be  substantial but would alleviate several of the most profound risks for coral reef  degradation, extreme temperatures and drying projected for 2°C.  Limiting warming to below 1.5°C requires similar energy system transformations to those  needed to hold warming below 2°C but the global decarbonisation of the energy system  needs to be faster and more pronounced.  The critical developments in the next 5 to 15 years, if the world is to get onto a 1.5°  pathway (or even a 2°C pathway), is a more rapid deployment of renewable energy and  low, zero and negative emission energy supply technologies. This involves a more rapid  retirement of existing emission-intensive energy system components and a corresponding  rapid upscaling in zero-emission and highly efficient technologies.  In the longer term (post 2030) technologies to remove CO2 from the atmosphere play a  considerable role in existing emission scenarios for achieving either 1.5°C or 2°C, and the  need for these by itself does not appear to be a differentiating element between the 1.5°C  limit and higher levels of warming. Depending upon the success in deployment of  renewable energy, energy efficiency, electrification of transport systems and reductions in  non-CO2 GHG emissions, low scale deployment of negative emissions technologies would  need to start in the late 2020s early 2030s. The scientific literature at present points to  BECCS as the most likely available option with potential to grow to large-scale deployment  at limited economic costs.  Given the uncertainties surrounding the potential for negative emissions technologies to  be deployed at scale, it would seem prudent that policy aims to minimise the need for  this. Even with rapid deployment of renewable energy and energy efficiency, with very  rapid emission reductions between now and 2050 the physical presence of so much CO2 in  the atmosphere due to past human activities means some level of negative emissions is  virtually unavoidable at this stage if the Paris Agreement long-term temperature goal is to  be met. As a consequence, it is important that the initial and most urgent focus on Paris  Agreement compatible policy actions is on the rapid deployment of renewable and other  low or zero carbon energy systems, combined with rapid improvements in energy  efficiency of industry, building and housing, and electrification of transport systems.