  The Climate Justice Alliance (CJA) is a collaborative  of over 40 community-based groups, alliances  and movement support organizations in Indigenous,  African American, Latin@, Asian Pacific Islander  and working class white communities. In 2013,  CJA launched the Our Power Campaign (OPC):  Communities United for a Just Transition, a national  effort uniting communities fighting fossil fuels and  other polluting industries around a common vision  and strategy—to transition the economy in ways  that reduce greenhouse gas emissions at the source,  restore equity, and put decision-making in the hands  of communities.    Grassroots Global Justice (GGJ) is an alliance of  59 US-based grassroots organizing (GRO) groups  organizing to build an agenda for power for working  and poor people and communities of color. GGJ  focuses on bringing GRO organizations into a  long-term process of relationship building, political  alignment and the development of transformational  leadership. The membership of GGJ adopted a  framework in 2011 that calls for a holistic approach  to building grassroots global justice: No War, No  Warming, Build an Economy for the People and the  Planet. We weave and bridge together US-based GRO  groups and global social movements working for  climate justice, an end to war, and a just transition  to a new economy that is better for people and the  planet. GGJ is a co-founder of CJA and the World  March of Women-US Chapter.    The Climate Justice Alliance (CJA) along with its staff, members, and allies served on the leadership team that  helped organize the historic People’s Climate March and a series of other events during the People’s Climate  Week, September 20-23, 2014.  Several groups that helped to organize the People’s Climate March have shared their stories and perspectives of  the march and how they helped to make it a reality. Many CJA members have read and appreciate the contributions  they’ve made to the historical record in the telling of their stories. Contained in the pages of this report is  the CJA story. It reflects our understanding, experiences, and analyses in the process of planning and organizing  the Climate Week mobilizations, actions and events. We also share lessons we’ve learned along the way. This  report is not meant to be a definitive account of the organizing process; rather to add our voices— the CJA  narrative—into the mix.  We invite you to read our story…  IT TAKES ROOTS TO  WEATHER THE STORM  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014:  A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY    A global economic system that relies on unbridled industrial growth,  exploitation of natural resources and people, and diminishing controls over  waste and pollution have brought us to a tipping point. The vast majority of  the world’s scientists confirm what we witness and experience every day—that  the health of the planet is in jeopardy and humans are to blame. False promises  of market-based solutions—for example, Reducing Emissions from Deforestation  and Forest Degradation (REDD), Climate Smart Agriculture, Sustainable  Energy for All—and costly technological fixes such as waste incineration are  being promoted by corporations and embraced by world leaders. At best, these  policies will not go far enough; at worst, they will reproduce the exploitative  practices that lead to even greater instability, inequality and harm to people  and the planet. As the United Nation Framework Convention on Climate Change  (UNFCCC) 21st meeting of the Congress of Parties (COP) in Paris, France this  December approaches, it is becoming increasingly clear that the intransigence  and false promises of the world’s economic and political elites will not solve  climate change. A powerful, independent, diverse, global social movement is  needed to make the demands and take the bold actions required to make the  change we need.  Such a social movement is growing in the United States. Indigenous, African  American and other communities of color and working class communities have,  despite limited resources, effectively used grassroots organizing, alliance/  coalition building and direct action to win significant victories against polluting  industries; for example stopping the expansion of oil refineries, shutting down  waste and coal incinerators, and preventing life-of-mine permits from being  awarded, etc. Their campaigns have prevented massive amounts of new carbon  emissions from reaching the atmosphere. These communities have become  central to the leadership of a diverse, growing, mass-based climate movement  that is needed to win real change. The historic Climate Week and People’s  Climate March (PCM) in New York City in September, 2014 were important  steps in this direction.  WE ARE FACING AN ECOLOGICAL CRISIS OF EPIC PROPORTIONS. THIS MOMENT  AND OUR CURRENT CONDITIONS REQUIRE NOT ONLY NEW SOLUTIONS TO OLD  PROBLEMS, BUT ALSO NEW STRATEGIES, PATHWAYS AND RELATIONSHIPS TO BRING  ABOUT THE BOLD AND LASTING CHANGE NECESSARY TO SUSTAIN LIFE AND HEAL  THE PLANET.  THE MOMENT AND THE MOVEMENT  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY Coordinated by a diverse Mobilization Support  Team1 (MST) of about a dozen local, regional and  national organizations, coalitions and alliances  with additional organizing support from a strong  local New York-New Jersey Host Committee,  dozens of organizing “hubs”  and ultimately over 1500 organizations,  the PCM was the  largest climate march and environmental  justice mobilization in  history. Approximately 400,000  people turned out on the streets  of Manhattan on September  21st to raise awareness of the  increasing urgency of climate change. One of  the largest delegations—approximately 19,000  members of the Climate Justice Alliance (CJA), plus  an estimated 20,000 people from allied grassroots  organizing groups—helped highlight how  low-income communities are hit first and worst by  the floods, droughts and storms and at the same  time are cultivating real solutions on the frontlines  of the crises; solutions that governments need  to follow. And it laid plain that huge numbers of  people believe the present federal policy approach  is insufficient to avert the crises we are facing. The  People’s Climate March also illustrated to the world  there is indeed a social movement for climate justice  growing in one of the countries most responsible  for the greatest ecological crises of our times.  The Climate Justice Alliance played a central role in  the planning of this historic People’s Climate March  (). The CJA was also key to organizing the  People’s Climate Justice Summit (-), had  a large contingent at the Flood Wall Street Action  (), sponsored the People’s Tribunal ()  and organized an action outside the United Nations  during the UN Climate Summit (). While  ensuring the success of the week, CJA was primarily  concerned with lifting up the visibility and voices  of frontline, Indigenous and communities of color  in the march, shifting the center of gravity of the  climate movement and strengthening the Alliance  itself. The overarching goals of CJA’s participation  in the planning and implementation  of this climate convergence were to:  • Build the Bigger We by strengthening  relationships with larger  national organizations, linking local  priorities to national and global  statements of solidarity and connect  our campaigns and struggles.  • Empower Communities and Local Climate  Justice Organizations by raising the visibility of  local, regional and national frontline fights; lifting  up place-based leadership and expertise; and  embedding issues of justice and equity at the core  of all emerging narratives and political strategies.  • Build CJA by mobilizing members from around the  country to participate in the mobilization as a CJA  contingent and aligning national gatherings from  Detroit to Richmond with the local organizing in  New York/New Jersey.  • Impact Policy in New York by shaping the  climate justice agenda of the New York City Mayor  and challenging the New York Governor to ban  fracking.  In addition, CJA leadership saw the opportunity to  build a political agenda around a “systems change”  analysis. CJA members and allies clearly articulated  the need to break from the current system of  over-exploitation, over-consumption, over-production  and extractivism and, in its place, implement the  diverse, place-based solutions, practices, methods  1 The central coordinating body for the PCM was the Mobilization Support  Team (MST), which included: 350.org, ALIGN, Avaaz, Blue Green Alliance,  Climate Justice Alliance, Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives, New  York City Environmental Justice Alliance, Oil Change International, SEIU  Locals 32BJ and 1199, Sierra Club, and UPROSE. CJA member organizations  were core conveners and organizers of this mobilization: NYC-EJA was a  co-facilitator of the New York-New Jersey Host Committee, the main local  coordinating body for the PCM, which also included Ironbound Community  Corporation in Newark and UPROSE in Brooklyn (both CJA members).  PCM was the  largest climate  march and  environmental justice  mobilization in history.  4 IT TAKES ROOTS TO WEATHER THE STORM  2 In the Our Power movement the term Frontline Communities refers to  communities that are hit first and worst by climate, economic or other crises.  Our Power Campaign states: “Communities on the frontlines of climate  change are the ones cultivating real, place-based solutions to address the  global ecological crises… They are also organizing to stop pollution and  poverty at the source, confronting the root causes of the climate crisis.”  and systemic alternatives being created in frontline  communities.3 This was particularly important for  CJA in light of the PCM’s final agreement not to align  on specific demands in order to keep the message  general and prioritize a bigger tent. CJA’s leadership  in the planning and coordination of the People’s  Tribunal, the People’s Climate Justice Summit, the  PCM, and two aforementioned direct action demonstrations  also buttressed the efforts of its members  to build power, as they were able to leverage their  membership in CJA to reinforce local efforts. Finally,  organizing the PCM raised CJA’s level of visibility  and established its leadership, historical contributions,  and expertise on sources and impacts of  climate change and environmental justice. CJA is  now a recognized force in this movement that more  established or better-known organizations must  contend with moving forward.  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY 3 Mary Lou Malig, Burning the Planet, One Climate COP at a Time (/14)  The mobilizations, actions and other activities  held during the NYC Climate Week are considered  important events inside a much broader and  protracted movement aimed at addressing the root  causes of climate change and building up real community-  led solutions. A sober analysis of the historic  relationship between the national mainstream environmental  movement and the environmental  justice movements reveal the latter has struggled  for decades with various forms of racial, economic,  gender and now climate injustice both within the  movement and outside of it. The environmental  justice movement has nonetheless worked to lift up  the voices, the resilience and the bravery of frontline  communities while organizing to end harm against  these communities and the earth. And it has pushed  for new ways of relating with one another to bring  about greater impact and more substantial change.  We uphold the following values and practices toward  a strategy that can help us win:  1. A winning climate movement requires the  leadership of frontline communities most impacted  by health, environmental, racial and economic  injustices associated with the ecological crises.  Further, movement leaders must be guided by  a collective vision, a clear understanding of  the problem, tried and tested community-led  solutions, and strategies that move logically and  appropriately from problem to solution.3 The  articulation of problems and solutions must simultaneously  address crises in the economy,  democracy and climate. Finally, campaigns  addressing these intersecting crises must employ  a range of strategies and tactics that include  direct action, mobilizations, and policy advocacy.  2. A winning climate movement needs to be  broad-based, inclusive and diverse, reflecting all  those ultimately impacted by climate change.  It must possess a willingness to struggle through  differences to attain greater alignment around  strategies, politics and vision, not only among  mainstream environmental and environmental  justice groups in the movement, but also with  other sectors such as labor, youth, faith, economic  and racial justice, health professionals and more.  3. A winning climate movement must be guided  by a vision of systemic change that is place-based,  defined by local knowledge and safeguards for  human and ecological health. That vision must  be strong and cohesive with strategies that  build power to scale, power that is bottom-up  and rooted in frontline communities of practice.  Further, it must support and appropriately scale  up solutions; stop the harm from happening  (pollution, extraction, etc.); shift the minds,  hearts and practices of people around the world  to join in this struggle for human existence; and  build a strong strategic and compelling argument  articulated in a unified voice.  4. A winning climate movement must be resourced  collectively and equitably. Building a movement  like this requires sufficient material, non-material  and financial resources to support the capacity  of people and movement actors to organize,  implement real solutions, fight for systems  change, and build the systems, institutions and  processes that support this change.  5. A winning climate movement must link with  international allies and social movements for  greater solidarity and impact. The interconnectedness  of economic and political systems and the  transnational behavior of corporations requires  that movements calling for system-wide change  and greater government and corporate accountability  to humanity and the earth be connected in  strategic ways.  BUILDING  A WINNING CLIMATE MOVEMENT  6 IT TAKES ROOTS TO WEATHER THE STORM  6. A winning climate movement requires that mobilizations  and actions be strategically organized,  coordinated and timed to make key advances.  Climate Week activities and the collaborative  processes and coordination of the PCM gave us the  opportunity to practice and test these principles.  Their application impacted the overall outcome of  these activities, resulted in important movement  advances, and revealed valuable organizing lessons.  The PCM was timed to coincide with the United  Nations Climate Summit on September 23 in order  to challenge the increasing corporate takeover of UN  climate negotiations and the privatization of land,  water and air.4 Around the world, all eyes were on  the United Nations to hear what the nations’ leaders  were saying about climate. What they saw were  over 400,000 people representing a variety of allied  movements in the United States voicing concerns  over climate change. The March organizers sent a  clear message to the world that the people of the  United States are willing to take action on climate.  The PCM created space for frontline communities  to put forward a vision of local solutions, not just  highlight problems. It also helped to open political  space for victories to be won on climate policy5 and  set the foundation to begin transcending the existing  cultures of practice and relationships between  national environmental groups (henceforth “big  greens”) and environmental justice groups. The  march served as a great model of shared leadership,  capacity and resources. It created opportunities  for grassroots organizing and climate policy organizations  from the New York region and around  the country to collaborate in its planning, laying  the groundwork for an ongoing commitment to  building a broader, united U.S. climate movement.  Connections forged in recent years6 laid the basis for  relationships between groups that would not have  ordinarily worked together. This coming together  demonstrated a new willingness to build power for  a common cause and a new level of cooperation.  PCM organizers were able to see and experience on a  small scale what collaborative resourcing could look  like. Though an imperfect process—as it was new to  those involved—resources of all kinds were raised,  shared, passed on, etc. There was a demonstrated  commitment by all, including national allies, to  support frontline leadership and participation.  Finally, the PCM provided space for other movement  sectors in the United States to participate in the  march, elevate their voices and concerns and  demonstrate solidarity with others, including  student and youth, faith-based groups, immigrant  rights organizations, labor unions, health care professionals,  scientists and new constituencies who  are beginning to see themselves as part of a growing  popular movement on climate. Significantly, the PCM  provided space for the participation of international  allies not only in solidarity mobilizations around  the world, but also in all Climate Week activities and  actions. They testified in the Tribunal, facilitated  and spoke on panels in the People’s Climate Justice  Summit and participated in the Flood Wall Street  and United Nation actions.  4 See CJA’s Call to Action ().  Civil society has increasingly been pushed out of the UN  spaces by more restrictive rules on participation, while the presence of  businesses and corporations has grown substantially.  5 For example, according to Wes Gillingham of Catskill Mountainkeepers,  “the climate march was a vehicle for showing opposition to fracking. There  were a lot of signs about fracking there and good press connecting the  issue to the march. One article in the press mentioned fracking as the most  abundant of all signs. All of that added pressure to the governor to make a  decision based on political opinion across the state.” (email to I. Kilimanjaro  /15).  6 For example, several members of the Mobilization Support Team—  including staff from 350.org, CJA and Sierra Club—shared (in separate  interviews with I. Kilimanjaro) that the first Building Equity and Alignment  for Impact initiative started by the Overbrook Foundation was one of the  key spaces where cross-sector conversations paved the way for planning  around the PCM to take place.  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY   THE GENESIS  While early exchanges about a 2014 NYC climate  mobilization can be traced back to discussions in  a number of different movement circles, members  of Climate Justice Alliance had their first set of  exchanges during a couple of movement strategy  sessions held in the Summer and Fall of 2013. At  these gatherings—the Extreme Energy Extraction  Summit in Minnesota and the Common Ground  Collaborative in upstate New York—Tom Goldtooth  of the Indigenous Environmental Network (IEN)  proposed that members of CJA and other grassroots  groups ask the big greens to support a climate justice  protest in NYC, led by Indigenous and environmental  justice/climate justice communities.”Then in early January 2014, “when CJA first learned  about the Ban Ki-Moon Summit, we [a group of  organizers inside CJA] had a discussion with the New  York City Environmental Justice Alliance (NYC-EA)  about the possibility of collaborating with 350.org  to mobilize a street protest around this event. 350.  org had already been in touch with Avaaz, the Sierra  Club and some other big greens about organizing this  protest, and were keen to work with local NYC groups.  So when NYC-EJA informed us that they would only  engage with the big greens if CJA got involved, we  started preparing a pitch to the CJA Leadership Body  (representatives of all CJA members groups) as well  as the CJA Steering Committee. We also initiated a  preliminary call to discuss possibilities with 350.  org, the Sierra Club and Avaaz.”8 The larger organizations—  especially 350.org and the Sierra Club—  understood the need to have local NYC base-building  organizations involved to establish credibility across  the five boroughs. They also had been interested in  collaborating with CJA since the merger of the 1 Sky  Coalition and 350.org. So, after an initial convening  of local environmental justice groups, anti-fracking  groups, organized labor and these big greens in NYC  in February 2014, the idea for the People’s Climate  March was born.  Initially, there was considerable debate among CJA  Steering Committee members on whether to take on  this monumental task. At the center of this debate  was a historical distrust that many grassroots  groups had with several national environmental organizations.  Specifically, some CJA members had  direct experiences of being tokenized, betrayed  and their work being appropriated by some of  these big greens. There were also differences in  strategy, many feeling that the national climate  policy agenda controlled by the big greens at times  has been fundamentally opposed to the core values  of grassroots environmentalism—self-determination,  democratic process, and solidarity.9 Too  often shaped by funder agendas and not popular  mandate, the big greens’ policy platforms have  focused on market-based solutions agreeable to  industry; promoting alternatives to fossil fuels  that are not truly renewable; and capital-intensive  pollution control technologies. For environmental  justice and grassroots groups, such climate advocacy  strategies not only exacerbated the carbon pollution  burdens, but also served to increase toxic pollutants  in the backyards of poor communities, entrenched  the market hegemony of the biggest polluting  corporations, and avoided naming (and thus failing)  to address the roots causes of the climate crises.  Grassroots and frontline community groups are not  only concerned about the storms, droughts and other  weather events that characterize climate change in  the mainstream narrative, but are concerned about  ORGANIZING  THE PEOPLE’S  CLIMATE MARCH  7 According to Ananda Lee Tan, one of the organizers of the PCM, “During  the Common Ground collaborative meeting Tom Goldtooth of the IEN  suggested that members of CJA, Indigenous communities, environmental  justice groups and big greens collaborate on organizing an event around  the UN Permanent Forum on Indigenous Peoples conference in September  2014. This meeting was hosted by Wes Gillingham of Catskills Mountainkeeper,  and included representatives from CJA, IEN, GAIA, 350.org, Sierra  Club and others.”  8 Email from Ananda Lee Tan to I. Kilimanjaro (/15)  9 See the Principles of Environmental Justice, written by the First National  People of Color Environmental Leadership Summit in 1991 (.  )  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY what some have called the dig, burn, dump economy  and its life cycle impacts. This means that naming  problems and framing solutions from the point of  extraction through dirty production, transportation  and waste disposal are critical to addressing climate  change.  After much debate, CJA committed itself to the  project; its investment evolved and grew exponentially  over time largely because of the leadership  from local organizations in New York and New  Jersey. It became clear that the PCM presented an  opportunity for frontline Indigenous communities,  communities of color and working class folks to  1) provide leadership in an expanding movement  on climate change through the coordination of the  PCM; 2) have a say in the direction of the PCM;  3) create space—in the Tribunal, the People’s  Climate Justice Summit and actions—to make clear  demands, especially given the lack of demands in  the PCM; and 4) create a platform to be heard, to  build strategically with allies to expand and advance  this growing movement. The commitment to the  Jemez Principles10 as a guiding framework for the  Mobilization Support Team process helped boost  the confidence of CJA members and allied environmental  justice groups, especially when it became  clear that these principles served to make the  Mobilization Support Team decision-making process  more transparent, democratic and accountable to  the community-based leadership of NYC. According  to Ananda Lee Tan:  When 350.org staff first asked for introductions  to local EJ groups in NYC (back in 2013),  we suggested that they exercise a measure of  respect in their dealings with our local partners,  especially in recognizing the historic leadership  of NYC-EJA members on local climate and environmental  justice issues. In the fall of 2013,  when early discussions of organizing a march  in NYC took place, we advised the national  groups that in order to establish credibility in  NYC, we needed to partner with NYC-EJA and  other local EJ groups first...as these groups  had the strongest relationships with both  community and political leadership (including  the Mayor’s office and cops) on such issues.  Later in the spring of 2014, when it became  clear that the national groups would have  trouble understanding the importance of EJ  principles, and were starting to fumble and  step on numerous local toes, we suggested  that the Mobilization Support Team adopt the  Jemez Principles of Democratic Organizing  as the basis (operating principles) for our  collaboration. While all the Mobilization  Support Team partners agreed to do so, we  acknowledged that [some] groups would not  be able to internalize the Jemez Principles  in their own operational structures. We also  suggested that the local New York-New Jersey  PCM Host Committee also adopt Jemez as part  of their operational agreements, and provided  some 101 advice on how to do so.  THE NUTS AND BOLTS OF  ORGANIZING THE PCM  The planning and coordination of the PCM required  an investment of a substantial amount of time, energy  and resources in a very short span of time. Initially  the organizing process was largely decentralized.  The Mobilization Support Team was created to make  key political, financial and logistical decisions. A New  York/New Jersey Host Committee anchored the local  and regional outreach efforts. Other committees and  online “hubs”11 were formed to address a variety of  needs, including logistical, communications, arts,  local organizing, fundraising and outreach, and more.  10 The Jemez Principles emerged from the Environmental Justice Principles,  and were developed in the early years of the “global justice” movement,  as a set of protocols to help large national NGOs understand, respect and  abide by the cultures of practice agreed to amongst grassroots, community  groups leading this movement. Jemez Principles for Democratic Organizing  were developed to forge common understanding and guide collaborative  processes and relationships between people from different cultures, politics  and organizations. They were created and adopted in 1996 by a multi-racial  group of activists for the Working Group Meeting on Globalization and  Trade ().  11 The hub sites allowed people planning to participate in the PCM to  coordinate self-organized projects and actions with whomever they  wanted around any set of parameters, such as those coming from the same  geographic location, the same skills set, a common identity or an issue  people cared about most. The online system provided tools for people to  communicate and build together.  10 IT TAKES ROOTS TO WEATHER THE STORM  A national monthly conference call was convened to  share information with activists and organizations  throughout the country.  To coordinate such a broad-based effort, PCM  organizers had to overcome several key differences  in politics, ideas and culturally-rooted organizing  practices. It challenged people to face and deal with  assumptions, privilege, power and stereotypes. It  also forced members of the Mobilization Support  Team to shift their orientations so that differences  in organizing, communication, decision-making and  leadership became strengths rather than obstacles.  For instance, the culture of some organizations  is to act with quickness, agility and at significant  scale. Others are more deliberate in building base  and relationships in the community based on core  organizing principles. Both approaches were put  to the test and effectively utilized during the PCM  process. Over a 7-month period, national environmental  organizations, grassroots economic and environmental  groups, labor unions and online activist  organizations engaged in an inspiring process of  shared leadership, principles and mobilizing—  resulting in one of the most significant political  actions in recent times. And for the first time in US  climate advocacy history, grassroots environmental  justice organizations became equal partners at the  table with national green groups and labor, working  in coordination, cross-racially and cross-sectorally  to organize this massive mobilization.In the course of organizing the PCM, there were  several important pieces that illustrate key areas of  agreement, struggle and work. They are captured in  the following sections.  12 Sally Kohn, After Years of Racial Division, the Green Movement Gets Brown  (/14)  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY FLIPPING THE SCRIPT FOR  A NEW MOVEMENT NARRATIVE  The composition and formation of the march was a  critical and difficult early negotiation, and arguably  one of the biggest gains for frontline, environmental  justice (EJ) communities.13 The significance of the  front of the march was substantial: it is the place  where local and national media focus their attention  for interviews, reporting, image frames and media  bytes. In the US climate movement, the front of  most climate marches has typically been a place  dominated by white college students and members of  Sierra Club Chapters. After the “Forward on Climate”  protest, some AFL-CIO leaders said they could not  take the US climate movement seriously as long as  they were defined by their lily white, Ivy League  image.14 Meanwhile, for the US environmental justice  movement, place-based, bottom-up leadership  is critical to maintaining respectful relationships  across the movement. In the end, Indigenous and  other environmental justice communities led the  march both literally and metaphorically, placing  faces and voices of communities most vulnerable to  and at the “frontlines” of the climate crisis front and  center. At stake in this decision was how well the  PCM would reflect the growing climate movement  in the United States in a way that demonstrated the  issues, faces and voices of those impacted first and  worst by climate change.  Despite an initial agreement by the NY-NJ Host  Committee in favor of UPROSE’s recommendation  that frontline communities be at the front of the  PCM (with youth of color forming the very first  line at the front), subsequent alternate frontline  proposals kept getting recommended; hence the  struggle. To be clear, that there was struggle didn’t  mean that national allies failed to see or appreciate  the value of the frontlines. Rather it simply meant  that people needed to move through the natural  process of debate to ultimately arrive at the best  outcomes. In the end, an agreement was reached by  which indigenous peoples and other people of color  from frontline communities would lead the march  under the banner Frontlines of the Crisis, Forefront  of Change. The youth delegation—specifically young  people of color and Indigenous youth under the  age of 24—were at the very front and the rest of  the frontlines contingent marched in the following  order: representatives of local communities  impacted by Hurricane Sandy, Indigenous Peoples’  Block, member groups of CJA and other environmental  justice communities from across the U.S.,  other storm-impacted communities, anti-poverty  groups, representatives of global south movements,  domestic workers, farm workers, immigrant rights  groups and the migrant justice contingent.  The other formations were carefully and intentionally  negotiated as well. CJA members suggested that  its brothers and sisters from labor unions march  behind the frontline community formation, carrying  the banner We Can Build the Future to denote the  important leadership role that workers have to  assume in building the new, low-carbon economy.  Members of the Mobilization Support Team agreed  that youth groups, students and families would  march with this contingent to illustrate the inter-  generational leadership of the movement as well  as to highlight the generations who will be building  the new systems to replace the old.  After labor, youth and families, the Movement  Support Team agreed that the solutions’ practitioners  should march along with green groups who advocate  for, create and practice economic alternatives in  community energy, zero waste, public transportation,  local food and ecosystem restoration – together  carrying a banner that read We Have the Solutions.  After the solutions formation, all the campaigning  organizations and issue-focused groups organizing  to stop polluting industries and their financiers were  invited to march under the banner We Know Who’s  Responsible. This acknowledged that the climate  13 Environmental justice communities are generally low income and/or  people of color communities directly impacted by one or more environmental  hazards; their residents tend to be excluded from processes and  discussions on environmental regulations and policies that directly impact  them; and they are subject to inequitable implementation of environmental  regulations, requirements, practices and activities in their communities.  14 According to Ananda Lee Tan, this comment was made at a meeting of  labor, environmental and other progressive movements that labor activist  Joe Uehlein of the Labor Network for Sustainability pulled together at the  same time as the Forward on Climate protest in DC. As a result, participants  signed a statement that can be found at this link: .  org/uncategorized/labor-environmental-leaders-move-beyond-differences-  to-a-common-vision/.  12 IT TAKES ROOTS TO WEATHER THE STORM  movement must continue fighting the corporations  driving the present economic system causing the  ecological crises—from dirty energy companies to  the oil, gas and mining sector, big agri-businesses,  waste corporations, Walmart and the banks…the list  was long. After this formation, the science and faith  communities followed with a banner that read The  Debate is Over—messaging that the age of “climate  denialism” is finally over, and that science and the  moral high ground are cardinal points for US leaders  to take action. Finally, all other march participants  were invited to join behind the banner that read To  Change Everything, We Need Everyone!  FUNDRAISING AND  RESOURCE SHARING  Groups involved in the planning of the PCM began  fundraising early on. Some national environmental  organizations like 350.org, Sierra Club and  Avaaz made initial pledges to the PCM from their  budgets amounting to over $1.5 million. This first  set of resources was placed into an entity called Res  Publica, a civic organization co-founded by Avaaz  and that has acted as a fiscal sponsor for many organizations.  While Res Publica managed core project  expenses and donations for the PCM, PCM organizers  initially agreed that each group would raise funds  for their own organizing efforts to prevent fighting  over resources.  According to GGJ National Coordinator Cindy  Wiesner, “even for the big greens, it became hard to get  resources, having to go into their general operating  funds to put money towards the mobilization.”15 Yet  these organizations had dedicated development staff  to make appeals to donors, and it eventually became  clear that many funders preferred giving money to  larger national groups rather than contributing to a  shared fund or donating to grassroots organizations  directly.16 This reinforced a power dynamic whereby  the larger national organizations were in charge of  money, leaving many local groups to constantly have  to ask for help. Finally, fundraising and resource  sharing took place unevenly and of the funding-related  challenges that arose, many resulted from  ineffective or absent systems and protocols for  collecting and sharing resources. While mistakes  were made, it is clear that organizing at this scale  and pace and within such a short planning window  made it difficult to avoid them.  CJA initially set conservative fundraising goals as  part of the National Coordination Team.17 As this  body was sharpening a proposal for $75,000 to  an allied funder, its members learned that several  national environmental organizations were planning  to approach a set of New York City funders with a  proposal for nearly $7 million. On learning about  the big green proposal, CJA organizers decided on  two major shifts to its fundraising strategy:  • Break out of the cultures of scarcity that grassroots  and EJ groups often get mired in, and ask for a  much bolder amount to reflect CJA’s long term  aspirations of building a durable, grassroots  movement rooted in communities of practice, and  • Intervene with CJA’s big green partners to a) point  out that such large sums of funding should be  prioritized for long-term organizing in frontline  communities, not simply one day media events,  and b) ensure that approaching funders was done  together, with all proposal language vetted by CJA.  The relationships CJA had cultivated with the Sierra  Club through the Building Equity and Alignment for  Impact Initiative process initiated by the Overbrook  15 Email to I. Kilimanjaro (/15)  16 In fact, local organizations like UPROSE struggled with fundraising. Even  when the larger organizations brought them to meetings and urged them  to fund these grassroots groups directly, the funders responded with a  “thanks, but no thanks,” and instead granted resources to the larger organizations.  17 Staying consistent with EJ principles, CJA determined that it would  follow the leadership of the NY members and in so doing, would provide  national support. This led to the formation of a National Coordination Team  that included local leadership from New Jersey, New York and national  alliances (e.g., Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives, Indigenous  Environmental Network, Grassroots Global Justice Alliance, etc.). While  NYC-EJA would lead on local organizing and coordination, the National  Coordination Team would help with national coordination, which included  fundraising, negotiating with funders, coordinating CJA and allied grassroots  involvement, and sitting at the national table with the national environmental  organizations to help ensure the messaging out to other national organizations  was consistent with CJA messaging, framing, Jemez approach, etc.  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY Foundation allowed them to leverage agreement  with the rest of the Mobilization Support Team  on these interventions. As the planning process  moved forward, and relationships within this team  grew stronger, a number of resources were made  available to CJA members and affiliates. Firstly,  Sierra Club and 350.org agreed to make transportation  subsidies available to provide buses, vans and  trains for EJ and grassroots groups to travel to NYC.  This amounted to over $180,000 and included the  expenses of 55 charter buses, which CJA members  filled. Additionally, 350.org, Greenpeace and some  other groups contributed towards some of the cost  of bringing on board local NYC organizers to work  with NYC-EJA.  On their own, CJA and its member groups stretched  themselves to bring in resources, presenting on  webinars that reached 89 funders . In total, they  raised over $300,000, of which over half was passed  through to local NYC and NJ partners. The initial  grant to CJA from the Chorus Foundation went to  the NYC-EJA, UPROSE and Ironbound Community  Corporation. Additional resources went to  Indigenous Environmental Network for supporting  and coordinating Indigenous Peoples’ delegations,  Right to the City for logistics and member outreach,  GAIA for supporting the overall coordination as well  East Coast member mobilization and to the Ruckus  Society for its direct action training. However, much  of the work leading up that point was done through  in-kind contributions. By the time resources began  to come in, grassroots groups were struggling  financially and wound up paying more for expenses  like flights and hotels because discounts were no  longer available. Other groups covered the travel  and lodging costs of large delegations of members  and international allies to New York out of their own  budgets, such as Grassroots Global Justice Alliance.  Lots of other types of resources were donated and  shared, including staff and volunteers, building rents  and usage, art supplies, fundraising events, meals,  fliers, media trainings and more. Strengthening the  practice around resource sharing and increasing  transparency in the allocation and decision making  power related to it are lessons towards a stronger  movement-building practice.  14 IT TAKES ROOTS TO WEATHER THE STORM  MESSAGING AND MEDIA  Communications was one of the most important  areas of collaboration in the PCM. Developing an  overall message for the march was challenging since  there were a number of issues that divided organizations:  Keystone XL, fracking, cap and trade. The  Mobilization Support Team made the strategic  decision to “caste the appropriate-sized net” by  agreeing on a broad set of core messages while  creating space for everyone to articulate their own  perspectives and political positions. The march  would “reset” the movement by providing a space  for working relationships to develop in the midst of  some deep political differences.  Determining the messengers for the event was  just as important as the message. The NY-NJ Host  Committee committed early to the principle of a  “People’s” Climate March, which meant that the  official spokespeople would not be celebrities or  traditional political leaders; rather it was agreed  that grassroots frontline leaders would be front  and center and given the support they needed for  their messages to reach a broad audience. One of  the key slogans, It Takes Roots to Weather the Storm,  was created at Center for Story-Based Strategy’s  workshop in Boston for a small cohort of CJA  members. This slogan means that the “communities  best prepared to survive today’s ecological crises are  those that have the strongest, deepest and longest  connections with the earth.” Traditional Indigenous  knowledge worldwide is critical for all people to  withstand the floods, droughts and storms resulting  from climate change. Participants in the training  agreed that “we needed to communicate to both the  UN and the US public that in order to meet the scale  and intensity of the climate crisis, world leaders  and nation states need to follow the leadership of  place-based communities and cultures of practice.  Traditional Indigenous knowledge coupled with  local, democratic resource governance is the most  reliable path for planetary survival.”CJA’s social media capacity grew steadily in 2014 as  member organizations organized Twitter storms and  Facebook campaigns for the Our Power Gatherings.  Due to collaborations with 350.org and The Other  98%, CJA’s social media reach grew exponentially  via the PCM—ultimately peaking at 1.5 million.  Our total Facebook reach on September 21 was  1,566,366. And the combined social media reachin relation to the PCM was over 8.8 million through  Facebook and 3.3 Twitter messages per second (on  the day of the PCM).  ARTS SPACES IN THE COMMUNITY  vs. OF THE COMMUNITY  The Arts Space was where the visually stunning  and memorable art captured in the media was  created for the People’s Climate March. Artists of  all kinds—from trained professionals to committed  volunteers—painted, drew, constructed and  assembled a variety of banners, parachutes, signs  carrying meaningful slogans, puppets and more.  One of the more popular symbols, the sunflowers,  were painted between UPROSE’s office and the Arts  Space. The sunflower was first used by local Detroit  environmental justice organizers as a symbol of  community resilience in the march to shut down  the Detroit incinerator during the 2010 U.S. Social  Forum. Since then, it has been used for the same  purpose and to demonstrate continuity of struggle  among CJA members. Its use in the march was led by  UPROSE. Shared Elizabeth Yeampierre, “We…chose  the sunflowers as an expression of solidarity with  Richmond and Detroit. We also wanted to show that  we weren’t alone; that we were part of something  bigger, stronger, united, inter-generational, and  based in communities of color.”“communities best prepared to survive  today’s ecological crises are those that  have the strongest, deepest and longest  connections with the earth.”  18 Interview with Ananda Lee Tan  19 Reach is the number of unique individuals who received timeline deliveries  of hashtagged messages. Similar to Timeline deliveries, there is no way to  know how many of the messages were viewed. Because the same users may  receive multiple timeline deliveries, measuring reach as well as deliveries  allows you to better understand the true spread of your message.  20 In interview with I. Kilimanjaro (/14)  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY An army of local and regional artists and dedicated  volunteers worked round the clock to create  stunning images of giant puppets, banners, placards,  parachutes and other creative props that defined  the character, beauty and creative spirit of the  PCM. The Indigenous bloc banners were used to  amplify messages on the Rights of Mother Earth and  opposition to tar sands and controversial cap and  trade policies. Many of CJA’s visuals were captured by  media outlets. While the Arts Space inspired the most  memorable elements of the march, upon reflection,  it also represented some of the most difficult contradictions.  It was established in a warehouse building  that was not easy to get to and was located in a  rapidly gentrifying Latin@ neighborhood. Artists  and volunteers struggled with limited capacity and  lead time, few financial resources, and a hectic and  sometimes chaotic environment. Some artists were  paid by organizations for their services while most  were volunteers. This created tensions in trying  to create a collective, collaborative space. The fact  that many of the artists and volunteers were white  added to the tensions. Although the volunteers and  organizers were able to get through the challenges  that this presented, future efforts will most certainly  need to take into consideration the dynamics that  are created when issues of race, class and gender are  not systematically addressed.  PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH  ORGANIZING PROCESS:  SOME KEY SUCCESS  Grassroots leadership from the frontlines: The  organizing principles and approach, as already noted,  succeeding in putting the leadership of frontline  communities at the center. This included authentic  grassroots leaders like Mari Rose Turac from  Richmond, CA (with the Asian Pacific Environment  Network), Kandi Mossett form North Dakota (with  Indigenous Environmental Network) and Stanley  Strugill from Appalachia (with Kentuckians for  the Commonwealth). It also included the NY/NJ  leadership, which, in spite of the many challenges,  worked hard, held people accountable, helped to  shape the messaging, got the word out, organized  people throughout the region to attend the march,  and did so much more. The real and perceived  leadership and participation in the movement  helped to broaden the base going forward, as people  were able to clearly see they have a place in it.  Forging new relationships: Coming back from the  experience, there were many beautiful stories of the  relationships built among the participants, especially  the delegates that caravaned on buses, trains, planes,  bringing with them their excitement, confidence, and  hope for the future. For the organizers, a successful  outcome of the PCM organizing process was the relationships  forged between people representing  different sectors and between representatives of  groups that have not always gotten along. Discussed  in more detail elsewhere in this report, this is  especially noteworthy for the relationships between  grassroots environmental justice groups and their  networks (including CJA) and national environmental  groups like 350.org, the Sierra Club, Greenpeace,  and Avaaz in light of historic tensions between environmental  justice groups and big greens. This was by  no means a perfect process and work is still needed;  but significant gains were made in this area.  Forcing political leaders to pay attention: The scale  of the march—and the presence of a diversity of  communities and sectors that went far beyond the  “usual suspects” of climate politics —sent a message  to the political leadership preparing to meet at the  United Nations that they need to be accountable to  the grassroots. This was most obvious when Ban  Ki-Moon, Al Gore and NYC Mayor Bill de Blasio finally  joined the March.  NYC-based grassroots leadership, leveraging PCM  to advance NYC-based campaigns: The local NY/  NJ leadership collaborations with national groups  leveraged the PCM to make progress with NYC-based  climate and environmental justice demands. Two  strategically timed banner drops by UPROSE and  NYC-EJA during the March highlighted the need  for waste equity and Zero Waste, a long-standing  local environmental justice campaign, as well as  the harmful impacts of gentrification in Brooklyn  and its intersection with climate change. Since then,  New York City’s Mayor announced the city’s new  16 IT TAKES ROOTS TO WEATHER THE STORM  sustainability plan called OneNYC and one of the  centerpieces, according to Eddie Bautista, “…is a  Zero Waste commitment with a stated goal of 90%  diversion of waste from landfills and a commitment  to overhaul the City’s commercial waste system.”  On the gentrification fight, Elizabeth Yeampierre of  UPROSE shared, “We had been reading articles and  hearing that a new property owner on our waterfront  was meeting with organizations and elected officials  to push for land uses that were inconsistent with our  community’s vision and needs. The company has  deep pockets and we felt we needed assistance to  amplify our concerns...The support that we received  from Greenpeace and Ruckus gave us visibility at an  unheard of scale—a scale that was equivalent to the  size of our struggle. The banners were seen by over  400,000 people which included our elected officials.  Days after, UPROSE was called to a meeting with two  congressional representatives and was able to gain  the support of important unions that marched with  us and begin the creation of a powerful coalition to  fight back against massive displacement.”PCM ORGANIZING PROCESS:  KEY POINTS OF CHALLENGE AND  CONFLICT  Although the challenges and points of conflict  are outnumbered by the successes and points of  alignment, many lessons are already informing  ongoing efforts.  Capacity, Internal Tensions and Priorities Given  that the People’s Climate Week was not originally in  CJA’s own plans and two “Our Power” Gatherings for  CJA members and allies were already in the works  (Detroit and Richmond), the Alliance set modest  goals at first—a small delegation of about 100  people. As it became clear that additional capacity  was required, CJA and its two co-anchors, Grassroots  Global Justice and Movement Generation, created a  division of labor that significantly stretched their  collective capacity.  One point of tension was around CJA’s priorities.  CJA National Coordinator Michael Leon Guerrero  raised the concern, “…how was CJA going to meet  its priority to build up and support the Our Power  communities when so much capacity and resources  were being directed toward the PCM and related  mobilizations? CJA was taking a huge risk; if we  didn’t have the numbers—if the PCM didn’t turn out  at least 100,000 people—it could have set us back as  an alliance and movement. Because of the level of  investment, it would’ve been a hard conversation to  have with members.”On the other side, national environmental organizations  and the PCM itself hired new organizers to  meet the urgent need to expand organizing capacity,  sometimes with insufficient training and oversight.  The result, according to organizer Samantha Corbin,  was that grassroots groups in the planning process  were being asked to provide input on decisions  without sufficient time to solicit input from their  bases:  Many people came in with good intentions and  tried to do it well; this was why it was possible  to work. But good intentions aren’t enough.  They are necessary but not sufficient. Some of  the depth was lost around time – not just that  it was a rapid pace, but some of the steps we  would take we weren’t able to take. Trying  to understand each other before jumping into  work never happened. All groups brought  something legit and real, but I saw lack of understanding  and appreciation.  Samantha’s assessment speaks to several important  elements that must be put into place to minimize  mistakes, burn-out, hurt feelings and more in any  comparable future collaborative planning process:  relationship and trust-building; effective systems  of communication and accountability; and principle-  guided work process and decisions. All of  these get quickly lost and/or overlooked in the  acceleration of a planning process if they are not  built in early on.21 Email from Elizabeth Yeampierre to I. Kilimanjaro (/15)  22 Interview with I. Kilimanjaro (/15)  23 Interview with I. Kilimanjaro (/15)  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY CJA and its grassroots member groups and allies  were confronted with how to engage members in a  meaningful way so that vision and principles of the  CJA and PCM were understood and shared rather  than members simply showing up and going home.  Yet the pace of the overall PCM organizing was not  especially conducive to this. Monica Wilson of the  Global Alliance for Incinerator Alternatives (GAIA)  shared that “…it was challenging to bring the whole  network along with us. We didn’t want to show up  as GAIA’s staff, but as the network and as CJA. And  so bringing members of our network along was  challenging, while having to move that fast. But we  tried hard and that’s how we all build a stronger  movement…” Yet people working across CJA in  endless meetings at UPROSE’s offices experienced  some powerful moments when the realization hit  that they could get so much done together. According  to Ananda Lee Tan, “When we got up to scale, there  was trust and collaborative practice. Bottom up  organizing can achieve better pace if adequately  resourced.”  Communications A challenge that several CJA  organizers articulated was the absence of an  efficient communication system among themselves  and with PCM staff and volunteers. Difficulties and  occasionally tensions grew as the pace quickened.  For example, while several of the environmental  organizations shared office space in the Manhattan  office, there was little coordination with Mobilization  Support Team leaders and march organizers  who were not in that space, particularly around  messaging and outreach. This meant that often  decisions were made but did not get passed along  to the people responsible for carrying them out,  which often led to conflicts, issues of accountability,  people doing things that were not in alignment  with the team, or making mistakes. On the day of the  March, many decisions were made on the fly and not  communicated, which led to a tremendous amount  of confusion for the volunteers and staff.  That the communications in the organizing process  were not effective doesn’t negate the incredible  efforts of key organizers to share information as  best as they could under the circumstances. Key to  point out here is that when systems, processes and  point people are not established and identified early,  breakdowns and confusion are more likely as the  pace naturally picks up and the event nears.  Race and Privilege Issues related to race and  privilege emerged in a few instances during the  18 IT TAKES ROOTS TO WEATHER THE STORM  organizing process. In the rush to do things, some  members of the team often did not take the time to  engage local leadership, frontline communities and  communities of color in the development of talking  points, posters and other communications materials.  This led, for example, to English-only advertisements  on the subway system and Chinese-language posters  with the wrong date of the PCM.  To the credit of many members of the Mobilization  Support Team, assumptions and missteps were  named, struggled over and addressed as best  as possible, resulting in greater accountability  in subsequent behaviors and decision-making  processes. One 350.org organizer, for example,  solicited input that helped produce more robust,  meaningful and appropriate talking points.  As referenced above, the dynamic between  newly-hired white college-age organizers working  in communities of color and organizers based  in those communities also created challenges  early on. But this changed, however, in the weeks  leading up to the march as the larger organizations  recognized the local leadership already organizing  in communities and learned that partnering with  these organizations and supporting local infrastructure  is a more effective approach to organizing in  those communities.  Organizing Culture Another challenge that emerged  was related to the different orientation that environmental  organizations and environmental justice  groups have around relationships. The larger organizations  tend to be more transactional in how they  relate to organizations they don’t know or haven’t  worked with—especially environmental justice  groups. On the other hand, the environmental justice  groups in CJA tend to be more transformational,  focusing on a deeper level of relationship-building  that leads to longer term change. This orientation—  which is rooted in different constituencies and  definitions of membership—leads to differences in  organizing strategies. The national environmental  organizations tend to have members that are  mostly middle class, white and/or affluent, whereas  CJA members and the communities in which they  organize are poor and working class Indigenous,  people of color and white communities. Neither  organizing approach is fundamentally wrong, but  each brings about different aims, and coherence of  such differing strategies can be a major challenge.  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY Members of the Climate Justice Alliance and allies helped to organize the  People’s Tribunal and Climate Justice Summit. These two critical compliments  to the PCM created space for activists, scholars and frontline communities from  around the world to delve more deeply into the drivers and impacts of climate  change, providing examples from their own communities while creating,  sharing and strategizing with one another on some important components of  building a winning climate movement. CJA partnered with the New School to  host the People’s Climate Justice Summit and the United Methodist Women to  host the People’s Tribunal at the United Nations Church Center.  PEOPLE’S CLIMATE JUSTICE SUMMIT  The People’s Climate Justice Summit (PCJS) provided space for the sharing  of experiences, struggles, and solutions between five local, 13 national and  10 international representatives of communities either directly impacted by  climate change or directly fighting the extreme energy economy and extractive  industries and market regimes that drive climate change. The PCJS hosted  panels featuring the stories, proposals, and demands of communities first and  most impacted.  During this two day summit, panelists addressed a host of false promises  and quick fixes that perpetuate inequalities, ecological destruction and  extreme energy development, including dams, waste-to-energy schemes,  carbon markets and climate smart agriculture. They also discussed systems  alternatives and strategies for a just transition in which their communities  were engaged. “In the opening panel of the [PCJS], speakers were in consensus  about rejecting the financialization of nature, but the question arose: might  we need to use pieces of this approach to keep corporations accountable or to  protect natural resources?”24 On the panel that followed, movement leaders  from Brazil to Mexico to New Jersey shared struggles against incinerators and  dams while articulating desires to transform the extractive economy via what  CJA calls just transition pathways. A third panel spoke to the threats of climate  smart agriculture to people and the planet and the importance of youth in  leading real solutions today.  24 Matt Feinstein, While UN Climate Summit Makes False Promises, People’s Climate Summit Brings Community-  Led Solutions (/14)  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE JUSTICE  SUMMIT AND TRIBUNAL  20 IT TAKES ROOTS TO WEATHER THE STORM  PEOPLE’S TRIBUNAL  On the same day as the UN Climate Summit, the  People’s Tribunal put on trial the corporations,  governments and the United Nations for doing  little to slow climate change and address issues of  adaptation, mitigation and historical responsibility  in real ways. On trial were the false promises they  continue to promote, which mask their inaction  and perpetuate the problems through destructive  market mechanisms. The People’s Judicial Panel—  whose role was to listen to and amplify the voices of  those who are witness to and impacted by climate  and environmental injustices—included movement  activists Lisa Garcia of Earth Justice, Julia Olson  of Our Children’s Trust, Rex Varona of the Global  Coalition on Migration, and Jeremy Brecher of the  Labor Network on Sustainability. The Judicial Panel  concluded that “based on the evidence we have  heard here today, the nations of our world are in  violation of their most fundamental legal and constitutional  obligations.”  Testimonies were offered by members of frontline  communities from 14 years of age and up and moved  from struggles in the New York / New Jersey region  through the United States to Mali, Honduras, Kenya,  Ecuador and Peru, to name a few. The issues about  which people testified were varied and included  the destruction of food systems, criminalization  of resistance, contamination of water and air, the  collusion of governments with corporations and  drug lords to steal land and rule by violence, the  poisoning of land through extractive chemicals and  technologies, and the imposition of trade agreements  that undermine local economies. The Judges  following the final panel shared this: “The good news  is that people are inspired and are still willing—after  all of this devastation—to come together to take  action...We were completely inspired to continue to  take action and not let the decisions of those across  the street change our minds.”  CONTRIBUTION OF  INTERNATIONAL ALLIES  With support from CJA, the Grassroots Global Justice  Alliance and Grassroots International co-chaired the  International Committee. Together they brought  a strong cohort of over 40 social movement representatives  from the Global South to the march and  tribunal with two purposes: accompany and show  solidarity to the communities and organizations  represented in CJA and represent the struggles and  perspectives of Global South communities. These  international allies made important contributions  to the panels at the PCJS and testimonies at the  Tribunal, demonstrating that we not only share  common enemies, but also share similar visions for  a just future. Engaging in these kinds of building  and sharing opportunities broke the isolation and  helped to advance a common agenda for climate  justice, systems change and just transition between  our members and our global partners.  Some of the key leaders were: Rosa Guillen of World  March of Women from Peru, Mithika Mwenda of Pan  African Climate Justice Alliance from Kenya, Maxime  Combes and Christophe Aguiton of ATTAC France,  Juliette Rousseau of Alternatibas, Mary Ann Manahan  from Focus on the Global South, Jorge Santiago  from DESMI (Social and Economic Development for  Indigenous Mexicans) in Mexico, Miriam Miranda  from the Black Fraternal Organization of Honduras,  Srijana Poudel from the Women Awareness Center  in Nepal, Elisa Estronioli from the Movement of  People Affected by Dams in Brazil, Mamadou Goïta  from the Institute for Research and the Promotion of  Alternatives in Development in Mali, and more.  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY FLOOD WALL STREET  The day after the PCM, direct action organizers—many from Occupy Wall  Street and the post-Hurricane Sandy movement assembly along with CJA  member organizations like Ruckus Society and Rising Tide North America—  organized the Flood Wall Street action at Battery Park. This was a response to  CJA’s Call to Action in solidarity with all communities on the frontlines of the  climate crises. This act of solidarity was significant in that Flood Wall Street’s  (FWS) mainly white organizers succeeded in respectfully aligning with and  engaging frontline communities in the planning of the action. CJA members  helped facilitate a number of the early action planning calls, facilitated dialogue  between local action organizers and environmental justice community groups,  and sent a large delegation of members and international allies to this action.  DIRECT ACTION  22 IT TAKES ROOTS TO WEATHER THE STORM  Over 2,000 people took over Wall Street to denounce  the role of multi-national corporations and financial  institutions in promoting fossil fuel exploitation and  other forms of destructive, extractive energy. FWS  organizers met their articulated goals of planning a  successful action more daring than the PCM both in  its form and its content, as they directly targeted the  economic roots of the climate crisis. FWS organizers  attempted to build relationships, solicit input and  attempt to make sure their frames were useful.  But “CJA folks weren’t available to respond or fully  engage in the action organizing process with them.  This was more a symptom of the over-stretched and  limited capacity, not from a lack of desire or from  political difference.”As in other direct action demonstrations, activists  (more often but not exclusively white) that are  willing and able to take actions involving a greater  level of risk are themselves often not grounded  in organizing practices that are relevant to  Indigenous, communities of color and working class  communities. In the course of planning this action,  the Ruckus Society provided guidance on what  consultation means and what actual collaboration  looks like. Some of the challenges in the planning  process required teaching people what it means to  do an action on behalf of the grassroots and helping  CJA folks understand why doing direct action was  also as critical.  Flood Wall Street coordinators organized a panel of  international allies and social movements before the  direct action to provide political education for those  who were to take part. The CJA delegates were well  prepared and participated with enthusiasm. Several  international delegates shared with Saulo Araujo  from Why Hunger that they were happy to see  people form the U.S. engaging in the struggle. “They  don’t see that too often in newspapers, because of  the filtering (blockade) by the corporate media. The  composition of different international voices was  another highlight. It seems the only voice from North  America was Naomi Klein.”ACTION AT THE UNITED NATIONS  On September 23, 2014, United Nations head Ban  Ki Moon convened a one-day UN Summit on climate  change to galvanize support from government  leaders for a new international agreement to curb  emissions and implement strategies for climate  change adaptation. Members of CJA, allies and  supporters attempted to bring a statement that  afternoon from the people to world leaders in  attendance at the Summit, but were refused entry to  the United Nations. The statement wrote:  We demand that world leader’s support and  move money to our community-led priorities  and local infrastructure needs to build  sustainable community economies, energy  democracy, zero waste, food justice, public  transit and affordable housing – pathways  that can create millions of long-term jobs and  put our communities back to work. We support  Indigenous peoples, our brothers and sisters of  the North and the Global South, in their climate  justice struggles linking land and water rights,  land title and the full implementation of the  UN Declaration on the Rights of Indigenous  Peoples.  Kandi Mossett of the Indigenous Environmental  Network risked her credentials to deliver the  full statement inside the UN Climate Summit. The  exclusion of community members on the frontlines  of the crisis reaffirmed what many already knew:  that today’s decision-making arenas have been  taken over by a corporate agenda that prioritizes  destructive profit-driven policies over the well-being  of families, workers and communities. Although  people were turned back, the action was important  for the message it sent to the world about a growing  movement of people on the frontlines of the climate  crisis.  25 Interview with I. Kilimanjaro (/15)  26 Email to I. Kilimanjaro (/15)  THE PEOPLE’S CLIMATE MARCH 2014: A CLIMATE JUSTICE STORY KEY LESSONS  FROM NYC  CLIMATE WEEK  Numerous lessons have emerged since the  September 2014 mobilizations and events, some of  which are presented below.  Lead with transformative vision and practice: NYC  Climate Week inspired many to share, evolve and/  or articulate transformative visions, often based on  principles and meta-narratives like just transition.  This concept is rooted in historic conflicts between  communities and workers on the frontlines of environmental  justice struggles and is about negotiating  pathways to local economies that are environmentally  sustainable and healthy. Spelling out these  transition pathways to new economies provides  vision, hope, and clear and actionable steps for  people and communities to take. For CJA’s Our Power  campaign, this involves implementing zero-waste  solutions, community housing initiatives, local food  systems and much more. Building such systems will  allow communities to be better prepared to weather  the storms that climate change is wreaking on  populations around the world.  Ensuring organizing at a fast pace doesn’t sacrifice  deeper-level questions. When things are moving fast  in an organizing process or mobilization, depth is  often lost as there is little time to spend discussing  and working through deeper-level questions. Early  in an organizing process, we need to ensure that  systems, guided by principles and clear protocols,  are put into place as best as possible. This means  anticipating volunteer and staffing needs and  developing/identifying training materials. It entails  building in time for training informed by an intersectional  analysis of race, class, gender, patriarchy,  and heteronormativity that also articulates local  conditions, dynamics and needs. We need processes  that clarifies responsibilities, chain-of command,  decision-making processes, and internal communication  flow. We also need time early on to struggle  24 IT TAKES ROOTS TO WEATHER THE STORM  through ideas and develop key messages and talking  points.  Invest in the capacity of frontline organizations and  their alliances to meaningfully and fully contribute  to and participate in national agenda formation,  events and other movement building activities.  Greater transparency is needed in resource-sharing,  allocation, and decision-making related to it. If  equal resource allocation went to grassroots organizations,  it would create new and better conditions  for impactful organizational and cross-sectoral collaborations.  The other side of this is that frontline  communities need to be honest and realistic about  their own money and capacity to strategically  participate in various movement processes, mobilizations  and events.  It is clear that integrity in this area is fundamental  to any social movement’s progress. In the sacred  process of building a movement for systems change,  clarity on the what is needed to do that—in terms  of finances, human capacity and in other ways—is  critical, as is the establishment of clear guidelines  how to use, distribute and deploy resources.  Its also necessary to navigate the tension between  available resources, the urgency of the moment, and  the potential impact of the action. Although CJA’s  resources and capacity were low and stretched thin,  there was a real need to organize activities other  than the PCM where frontline community members  could speak directly to needs, concerns, challenges,  solutions and calls to action. For example, Ruckus  Society and several CJA members and allies, in spite  of overall exhaustion once the People’s Climate  March was over, succeeded in coordinating the  strategic action at the UN in one day.  Take risks to build relationships and trust: The PCM  demonstrated how social movements today must  take bold yet thoughtful risks to build powerful relationships  and achieve desired results. Though  the process of building trust was imperfect, trust  and faith in one another grew with small successes.  “Everyone took political risks entering the process  and making decisions. This meant that march  organizers had to put their organizational and  personal positions on the back burner so that a  broad level of political alignment on strategies could  be reached.”27 Getting to this point, however, requires  investment in building trust. Said Samantha Corbin:  People were trying to build relationships with  each other in good faith, but at the same time  the speed and urgency of the organizing kept  increasing. Everyone (and every group) had  needs that weren’t being met which at times  led to everyone feeling preyed upon by the  other. At some point, members of every group  expressed feeling used or taken advantage of  or not being listened to…And I saw it as a real  stumbling block between the [grassroots and  national organizations].  Related to building trust and relationships is naming  and committing to address issues of race and privilege  in honest and respectful ways. In some circumstances,  this involves anti-racist and anti-oppression work  in order to avoid fragmentation or the reproduction  of the the same inequities inside the movement that  prevail in the broader society. Supporting leadership  of local, frontline communities isn’t simply a race  issue. But the central importance of consulting with,  building with, and supporting the local leadership of  communities of color manifests most clearly when  predominantly white organizations and activists  are attempting to work in communities of color. As  a demonstration of this principle, the CJA national  leadership itself didn’t consider stepping up into a  leadership role in the planning of the PCM without  the invitation from and ongoing consultation and  coordination with NY-NJ members and allies. And  once they stepped into this role, they prioritized  funding and supporting their local members and  allies.  Take risks to build power: To build power, strategic  risk-taking is needed. A challenge that impacted the  planning of the Flood Wall Street action was the fear  many people have about arrests with mass direct  action. Building training and thoughtful discussion  of tactics into an organizing process can address  these fears, equipping people with the tools and  information necessary to make smart choices about  when and how to step into powerful actions that  involved heightened personal risk.  Recalibrate the Movement: Those hit first and  hardest by the environmental and climate crises  should have their voices and concerns heard most,  and their strategic and tactical leadership should  be respected. “By prioritizing representatives of  frontline communities...we are starting to shift the  national climate discourse around where climate  solutions should come from.”  