CANADA AND THE UN CLIMATE NEGOTIATIONS:  A Paris Package that  shows Canada Cares  CLIMATE ACTIONNETWORKRacCANRÉSEAU ACTIONCLIMAT  SEIZE THE OPPORTUNITY TO MAKE  A DIFFERENCE BEFORE PARIS  November 2015  Canada and the UN Climate Negotiations: A Paris Package that shows Canada Cares  Canada has a lot of  catching up to do.  Since 1992 when the  United Nations Framework  Convention on Climate Change  (UNFCCC) was negotiated at  the Earth Summit, our country  has contributed less than its  fair share to the work we all  need to do to protect the  climate. The result in 2015 is  an economy over-reliant on  fossil fuels and investing less  than it could in the transition  to a 100% renewable energy  system to power our economy  and to ensure a healthy quality  of life.  From November 29th to December  11, 2015 in Paris governments are  expected to finalize negotiations  on a new agreement and package  of implementation decisions under  the UNFCCC1 to limit global carbon  pollution. Canada needs, however,  to start making things right ahead  of Paris starting at a meeting of  ministers hosted by France and  Peru November 8th to 10th and  at the G-20 in Turkey November  15-16th. Canadians and media can  use this document to compare  Canada’s performance at these  early meetings and in Paris against  metrics that have the best chance  of keeping the climate system  in balance.  There is a consensus among governments and  climate scientists that keeping the climate  system in balance requires that global warming  stay well below an average of 2oC above pre-industrial  levels. This level of warming, however,  exceeds what is safe for the world’s most  vulnerable countries. These countries are calling  for global warming of no more than an average  of 1.5oC above pre-industrial levels to protect  their dignity and well-being; a position endorsed  by the more than 950 organizations working  together to advance climate protection under  the auspices of Climate Action Network.  In its latest report, the Intergovernmental Panel  on Climate Change (IPCC) assessed the global  carbon budget implied by varying levels of  global warming. To have a 66% chance of keeping  temperature increases below 2oC requires  world-wide cumulative emissions to not exceed  1,000 GtCO2 (billion tonnes of CO2) between  2011 and 20502,3. An analysis of the aggregate  effects of governments pledges received by the  UNFCCC by October 1, 2015 shows that 75%  of the world’s global carbon budget will have  been consumed within 15 years (by 2030) AFTER  taking account of emission reduction promises.  The UNFCCC Secretariat concludes that “global  aggregate emission levels in 2025 and 2030  resulting from the INDCs (Intended Nationally  Determined Contributions) do not fall within  2oC scenarios”.4 The Secretariat also notes that  current INDC pledges do not “fall within leastcost  2oC scenarios”. If the goal is to prevent  1.5oC warming and if we want to increase the  probability of success (most people would not  accept a 33% chance of failure in almost any  decision-making scenario), then under current  commitments the entire global carbon budget  would be consumed much earlier.  Climate Action Tracker and the UNFCCC calculate  that government INDC pledges commit  the world to at least 2.7oC warming. Clearly,  government contributions to the current climate  negotiations fall well short of keeping the world  from dangerous levels of global warming.The latest round of UNFCCC climate negotiations  was launched in 2011 at the 17th Conference  of the Parties meeting in Durban, South Africa.  Governments agreed at that time to deliver a  new and universal greenhouse gas reduction  protocol, legal instrument or other outcome with  legal force under the Convention applicable to all  Parties by 2015 for the period beyond 2020.The negotiation of a new agreement for  the post-2020 period does not imply that  government commitments for 2020 are to be  abandoned. On the contrary, Parties with 2020  commitments are expected to live up to their  pledges and to increase their pre-2020 ambition7.  Accelerated ambition is required to get  the world on track to peaking global greenhouse  gas emissions and then setting a course for a  rapid and steep decline. Delaying action to 2020  simply makes achieving our 2025 and 2030 goals  more difficult to achieve.  An analysis of the aggregate  effects of governments  pledges received by the  UNFCCC by October 1,  2015 shows that 75% of  the world’s global carbon  budget will have been  consumed within 15 years  (by 2030) AFTER taking  account of emission  reduction promises.  CANADA RECOMMENDATION #1:  Strengthen efforts to meet  our 2020 domestic target  and enhance international  investments to secure  additional global reductions  Canada currently is on track to be at least 19%  above 2005 levels by 2020 relative to its 2020  target of cutting greenhouse gas emissions by  17% below 2005 (even after including dubious  contributions from land-based removals)8.  The federal government can significantly  enhance Canada’s international credibility on  climate protection by committing to strengthen  efforts to meet our 2020 domestic target and to  enhance international investments that secure  additional global reductions. International investment  options include financial contributions  to the UNFCCC Green Climate Fund and through  bilateral support and cooperation agreements.  Establishing a federal/provincial process,  starting with a meeting of First Ministers prior  to the Paris meeting, or soon thereafter, would  further signal Canada’s seriousness in turning  the page on a long history of inaction on the  climate protection file. Coordination among  federal, provincial/territorial, and municipal  governments, as well as First Nations, Inuit and  Metis communities is urgently needed if we are  to succeed in the transition to a climate friendly  energy system and quality of life.  CANADA RECOMMENDATION #2:  Strengthen Canada’s  INDC (Intended Nationally  Determined Contribution)  to the Paris negotiations  In spring 2015, Canada announced that it would  commit to cutting greenhouse gas emissions  30% below 2005 levels by 2030 as its contribution  to the UNFCCC climate negotiations.  Canada’s so-called Intended Nationally Determined  Contribution (INDC)9 failed to meet the  test of best practice as recommended by the  World Resources Institute10 and was rated as  inadequate by Climate Action Tracker11.  CANADA’S PROPOSED INDC GETS A  POOR GRADE FOR FAILING TO:  • Set a greenhouse gas reduction target in line  with its fair share or what’s required to limit  global warming to well below 2oC;  • Include adaptation commitments;  • Be transparent with respect to how Canada’s  target will be achieved; and  • Establish a robust domestic process for setting  our targets or development of domestic  and implementation plans.  A responsible target that would be consistent  with Canada’s capacity, our fair share, and  what is a scientifically credible emissions level  would commit the country to cutting national  greenhouse gas emissions by at least 35% below  2005 levels by 2025. Canada’s proposed target  misses the market by 5 years and is weaker  than required.  TO REACH A STANDARD THAT SHOWS  THE WORLD THAT CANADA CARES, WE  SHOULD COMMIT TO:  1. Take action in line with keeping global  warming to an average of 1.5oC and an  acknowledgement that limiting global  warming to safe levels implies phasing out  the use of fossil fuels and a transition to a  renewable, decarbonized energy system  by 2050.  a. Canada should develop a strategic  national plan by 2020 to shift rapidly  away from our high-carbon economic  development model to a sustainable  development model that ensures full  decarbonization of the economy by  2050.  2. A 2025 target of at least 35% below 2005,  a 50% reduction by 2030 and decarbonization  by 2050. Canada’s targets should be  expressed as a carbon budget.  3. Enshrine Canada’s greenhouse gas reduction  targets in domestic law with implementation  and enforcement responsibility  clearly identified and assigned.  4. Establish a robust domestic process for  developing a national climate protection  implementation plan in 2016 that involves  First Ministers (Prime Minister/Premiers),  appropriate federal, provincial/territorial  ministries, municipalities, and indigenous  representatives. A national action plan  must articulate clear timelines for implementation,  including spelling out financial  contributions and responsibilities for  federal, provincial/territorial, and municipal  governments.  5. Up to $4 billion CDN in financial contributions  by 2020 to international greenhouse  gas reductions through contributions to  initiatives like the Green Climate Fund and  other bilateral arrangements. Half of these  contributions should support mitigation  projects and half should support adaptation  projects.  6. Develop a national climate change  adaptation plan and commit to requiring  cumulative (including upstream and  downstream impacts, as well as  interactions with other relevant existing,  planned and proposed projects) climate  impact assessments for all infrastructure  investments.  7. Transparency so that all assumptions  underlying greenhouse gas emissions,  projections and measures can be quantified,  verified, and compared to other  country commitments. Canada especially  needs to be transparent with regard to its  calculation of the sources and removals  relating to the land sector.  8. Eliminate all subsidies to the fossil fuel  sector beginning immediately and being  completed no later than 2020.  CANADA RECOMMENDATION #3:  Contribute to a Successful  Outcome in Paris by  Endorsing a robust Paris  PackageA commitment to best practice standard for  Canada also requires pressing all governments  to agree in Paris to:  • An internationally binding agreement that  can be ratified and that establishes critical  infrastructure, including:  »» A Long-Term Goal in line with keeping global  warming to 1.5oC: the phase out of fossil  fuel emissions and phase in of 100% renewable  energy for all as early as possible, but  no later than 2050.  The requirement to develop national  strategic plans to decarbonize  economies by 2050 that would be  submitted to the UNFCCC by 2020 and  be in line with Agenda 2030 sustainable  development goals.  »» A “Paris Ambition Mechanism” to facilitate  the process of increasing ambition within  the Paris Agreements.  Current global commitments on offer  for Paris to cut greenhouse gas pollution  potentially commit the world to at least  3oC of warming. A short commitment  period ensures the world avoids locking  in low levels of ambition (agreement  in 2015 for a 10 year commitment  period locks down ambition until 2030).  It creates incentives for early action,  encourages political responsiveness to  falling prices of low-carbon technologies  and other ‘real world’ events, and  maintains political accountability  because current governments more  clearly responsible for achieving  targets.»» The Paris Ambition Mechanism rests on  three pillars:  Scientific adequacy assessments and an  Equity Reference Framework embedded  in the 5-year commitment periods,  including:  A no-backsliding principle.  A progression clause that ensures  countries increasingly upscale individual  commitments on mitigation and finance  in future cycles of commitments.  Common five-year commitment periods  for mitigation for all countries, as well  as synchronized five-year cycles for  provision of climate finance.  Collective and individual adequacy  assessments that include active civil  society participation and are based on  the most recent scientific assessments  combined with a science-based equity  reference framework.A process (or “matchbox”) that  matches conditional contributions  with international support, requiring  the following provisions in the core  agreement:  A mandate to the UNFCCC Secretariat  to set up a registry for conditional  INDCs15 (as early as 2016) in order to  clearly identify the potential mitigation  and adaptation actions that could be  unlocked with provision of means of  implementation (MOI). This should be  followed by establishing a transparent  matching facility at the 22nd Conference  of the Parties session (2016) to match  international financial, technological, and  technical support with supplemental,  conditional elements of INDCs from  particular countries. This matching  mechanism can build on the current  NAMA (Nationally Appropriate Mitigation  Actions) registry and should build on the  high-level facilitator process suggested  under Work Stream 2 (a work group developing  recommendations on enhancing  pre-2020 action).An invitation to countries to provide  further information on their mitigation,  adaptation and loss and damage needs  facilitated by support (financial and  capacity building) in order for this information  to be taken into account during  the next cycle of commitments.  A robust and common Measurement,  Review and Verification (MRV)  framework:  A common, tiered and dynamic MRV  framework that progresses towards  common accounting and MRV, respecting  respective capabilities  A provision to create a robust MRV  framework for public and private finance  provisions  Upfront information requirements for  each round of INDCs as reflected in the  Lima Call for Climate Action (Decision 1/  CP.20, paragraph 14)  • A Global Adaptation Goal that establishes  predictable and sufficient financing for  adaptation. The United Nations Environment  Programme estimates developing countries  could face adaptation costs of approximately  $150 billion USD a year by .17 The  Paris agreement should protect the dignity  of vulnerable populations by committing to  generate grant-based adaptation investments  of at least $50 billion USD a year beginning  by 2020 and to ramp up compensation for  loss and damage where adaptation is not  viable or practical.  »» Establish as a standalone commitment  within the Paris agreement for loss and  damage to ensure financial support flows to  those people most vulnerable and without  prospect of adaptation.  • Annual goals for public finance that secures  international public finance investments of  at least $100 billion USD with half going to  cutting carbon pollution and half to adaption  by 2020. The Paris Agreement should also  commit to the rapid phase-out of subsidies to  the fossil fuel sector. Studies suggest global  investment requirements in clean energy of  at least $1 trillion USD a year are required  by 203018 to stay below 2oC warming above  pre-industrial levels. Clearly, the Paris agreement  must create mechanisms to leverage  public finance and for stimulating private  investments in renewable energy. Creation  of a Global Technology Fund would support  achievement of a 100% renewable energy  system by 2050.  • Principles for social and ecological integrity  and transparent rules for the land sector  that prioritize the protection and restoration  of ecosystems and identify and facilitate  emissions reductions from all sources. It  is essential that government ensure that  emission reductions and removals from  natural ecosystems19 are in addition to action  in other sectors, and are in line with all  relevant international obligations. Actions  to reduce emissions in the land sector must  prioritize activities which promote rights,  food security, and protect biodiversity, and  allow for a per capita food security threshold.  These priority activities include reducing  and phasing out deforestation and forest  degradation, protecting natural forests, and  restoring degraded ecosystems for example  through re-wetting peatlands.  • Market Mechanism rules that:  »» Establish principles to ensure the environmental  integrity of the agreement. These  principles must require that emissions  reductions are real, additional, verifiable,  and permanent; avoid double counting  of effort; are supplemental to ambitious  national mitigation, ensure net atmospheric  benefits.  »» Allow only countries that have economy-  wide targets, preferably expressed as  multi-year carbon budgets, not just single  year targets, to use markets for compliance.  »» Ensure a common accounting system for  measuring and reporting reductions in both  host and sponsor countries.  »» Not recognize units from the Kyoto Protocol’s  pre-2020 mechanisms for compliance  with its post-2020 mitigation commitments.  • A Conference of the Parties decision that:  »» Puts in place the required decision-making  processes, mandates, rules and guidelines  required to ensure smooth and effective  operation of the Paris Agreement.  »»Mandates ambitious mitigation, adaptation,  loss and damage and monitoring for the  pre-2020 period.  »» Establishes robust processes for detailed  monitoring, review and verification to  ensure transparency and integrity.  »» Ensures a new Periodic Assessment (starting  in 2018 concluding before 2020, and  repeating every five years) that informs the  Paris Ambition Mechanism process.  Canada has an important job to do at home and  in the lead up to the Paris climate negotiations.  Committing to advancing our recommendations  would not only show the world that Canada  cares about protecting the climate and the  people, plants and wildlife that depend on it,  but it would set our country and the world on  a course toward a sustainable future for all.  