WHY THE PARIS CLIMATE GOALS REQUIRE A  MANAGED DECLINE OF FOSSIL FUEL PRODUCTION  PUBLISHED IN COLLABORATION WITH  THE SKY’S LIMIT  SEPTEMBER 2016  Australian Youth Climate Coalition  This report was researched and written by Greg Muttitt with  contributions from Hannah McKinnon, Lorne Stockman,  Steve Kretzmann, Adam Scott, and David Turnbull. It was  edited by Collin Rees. All are with Oil Change International.  Oil Change International is a research, communications, and  advocacy organization focused on exposing the true costs  of fossil fuels and facilitating the coming transition towards  clean energy.      In December 2015, world governments agreed to limit global average temperature  rise to well below 2°C, and to strive to limit it to 1.5°C. This report examines, for the  first time, the implications of these climate boundaries for energy production and use.  Our key findings are:  Y The potential carbon emissions from the oil, gas, and coal in the world’s currently  operating fields and mines would take us beyond 2°C of warming.  Y The reserves in currently operating oil and gas fields alone, even with no coal,  would take the world beyond 1.5°C.  Y With the necessary decline in production over the coming decades to meet climate  goals, clean energy can be scaled up at a corresponding pace, expanding the total  number of energy jobs.  One of the most powerful climate policy levers is also the simplest: stop digging for  more fossil fuels. We therefore recommend:  Y No new fossil fuel extraction or transportation infrastructure should be built, and  governments should grant no new permits for them.  Y Some fields and mines – primarily in rich countries – should be closed before fully  exploiting their resources, and financial support should be provided for non-carbon  development in poorer countries.  Y This does not mean stopping using all fossil fuels overnight. Governments and  companies should conduct a managed decline of the fossil fuel industry and ensure  a just transition for the workers and communities that depend on it.  In August 2015, just months before the Paris climate talks, President Anote Tong of the  Pacific island nation of Kiribati called for an end to construction of new coal mines and  coal mine expansions. This report expands his call to all fossil fuels.    ENOUGH ALREADY  The Paris Agreement aims to help the world avoid the worst effects of climate change  and respond to its already substantial impacts. The basic climate science involved is  simple: cumulative carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions over time are the key determinant  of how much global warming occurs.a This gives us a finite carbon budget of how much  may be emitted in total without surpassing dangerous temperature limits.  We consider carbon budgets that would give a likely (66%) chance of limiting global  warming below the 2°C limit beyond which severe dangers occur, or a medium (50%)  chance of achieving the 1.5°C goal. Fossil fuel reserves – the known below-ground  stocks of extractable fossil fuels – significantly exceed these budgets. For the 2°C or  1.5°C limits, respectively 68% or 85% of reserves must remain in the ground.  This report focuses on the roughly 30% of reserves in oil fields, gas fields, and coal  mines that are already in operation or under construction. These are the sites where  the necessary wells have been (or are being) drilled, the pits dug, and the pipelines,  processing facilities, railways, and export terminals constructed. These developed  reserves are detailed in Figure ES-1, along with assumed future emissions from the two  major non-energy sources of emissions: land use and cement manufacture.  We see that – in the absence of a major change in the prospects of carbon capture and  storage (CCS):b  Y The oil, gas, and coal in already-producing fields and mines are more than we can  afford to burn while keeping likely warming below 2°C.  Y The oil and gas alone are more than we can afford for a medium chance of keeping  to 1.5°C.    Figure ES-1: Emissions from Developed Fossil Fuel Reserves, Plus Projected Land Use and Cement Manufacture  Sources: Rystad Energy, International Energy Agency (IEA), World Energy Council, Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC)  a The carbon budgets approach does not apply to other greenhouse gases, whose effects are factored into the calculation of carbon budgets in the form of  assumptions about their future emissions.  b CCS has not been successfully deployed at scale despite major efforts, and there are doubts as to whether it will ever be affordable or environmentally safe.  6 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  WHEN YOU’RE IN A HOLE, STOP DIGGING  Traditional climate policy has largely focused on regulating at the point of emissions,  while leaving the supply of fossil fuels to the market. If it ever was, that approach is  no longer supportable. Increased extraction leads directly to higher emissions, through  lower prices, infrastructure lock-in, and perverse political incentives. Our analysis  indicates a hard limit to how much fossil fuel can be extracted, which can  be implemented only by governments:  Y No new fossil fuel extraction or transportation infrastructure should be built,  and governments should grant no new permits for them.c  Continued construction would either commit the world to exceeding 2°C of warming,  and/or require an abrupt end to fossil fuel production and use at a later date (with  increasing severity depending on the delay). Yet right now, projected investment in  new fields, mines, and transportation infrastructure over the next twenty years is  $14 trillion – either a vast waste of money or a lethal capital injection. The logic is  simple: whether through climate change or stranded assets, a failure to begin a  managed decline now would inevitably entail major economic and social costs.  The good news is that there is already progress toward stopping new fossil fuel  development. China and Indonesia have declared moratoria on new coal mine  development, and the United States has done so on federal lands. These three  countries account for roughly two-thirds of the world’s current coal production.  In 2015, U.S. President Barack Obama rejected the proposed Keystone XL tar sands  pipeline by noting that some fossil fuels should be left in the ground, and there  is growing recognition of the importance of a climate test in decisions regarding  new fossil fuel infrastructure.d There is an urgent need to make the coal moratoria  permanent and worldwide, and to stop new oil and gas development as well.  Ending new fossil fuel construction would bring us much closer to staying within our  carbon budgets, but it is still not enough to achieve the Paris goals. To meet them,  some early closure of existing operations will be required. Every country should do  its fair share, determined by its capacity to act, along with its historic responsibility  for causing climate change. With just 18% of the world’s population, industrialized  countries have accounted for over 60% of emissions to date, and possess far greater  financial resources to address the climate problem.  Most early closures should therefore take place in industrialized countries, beginning  with (but not limited to) coal. While politically pragmatic, the approach of stopping  new construction tends to favor countries with mature fossil fuel industries; therefore,  part of their fair share should include supporting other countries on the path of  development without fossil fuels, especially in providing universal access to energy.  Therefore:  Y Some fields and mines – primarily in rich countries – should be closed before fully  exploiting their reserves, and financial support should be provided for non-carbon  development in poorer countries.  Additionally, production should be discontinued wherever it violates the rights of local  people – including indigenous peoples – or where it seriously damages biodiversity.  c This does not mean stopping all capital investment in existing field and mines, only stopping the development of new ones (including new project phases).  d   EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 7  A MANAGED DECLINE AND A JUST TRANSITION  Stopping new construction does not mean turning off the taps overnight. Existing  fields and mines contain a finite stock of extractable fossil fuels. Depleting these stocks,  even including some early closures, would entail a gradual transition in which extraction  rates would decline over a few decades. This is consistent with a rate of expansion of  clean energy that is both technically and economically possible.  We consider a simple modelling of world energy sources under two scenarios: 50%  renewable energy by 2035 and 80% by 2045, both with a complete phase-out of  coal usage, except in steel production. It is compared with the projected oil and gas  extraction from existing fields alone.  We conclude that:  Y While existing fields and mines are depleted over the coming decades, clean energy  can be scaled up at a corresponding pace.  While this pace of renewable energy expansion will require policy support, it continues  existing trends. In many countries – large and small, rich and poor – clean energy is  already being deployed at scale today. Denmark now generates more than 40% of  its electricity from renewable sources, Germany more than 30%, and Nicaragua 36%.  China is now the largest absolute generator of renewable electricity, and expanding  renewable generation quickly. In most contexts, the costs of wind and solar power  are now close to those of gas and coal; in some countries renewable costs are already  lower. The expansion of renewable energy will be harder where there are weak grids  in developing countries, hence the importance of climate finance in supporting a  non-carbon transition.  As for transportation, electric vehicles are now entering the mainstream and are on  course to soon be cheaper than gasoline or diesel cars. With sufficient policy support  and investment, the growth in clean energy can match the needed decline in fossil fuel  extraction and use.  While there are clear advantages to clean energy – lower costs, greater employment,  reduced local pollution, and ultimately greater financial returns – the transition will not  be painless. Energy workers’ skills and locations may not be well matched to the new  energy economy. Whole communities still depend on fossil fuel industries. There is a  vital need for a careful, just transition to maximize the benefits of climate action while  minimizing its negative impacts.  Governments should provide training and social protection for affected energy workers  and communities. Where appropriate, they should require energy companies to offer  viable careers to their workers in non-carbon areas of their business. Governments  should also consult with communities to kick-start investments that will enable carbondependent  regions to find a new economic life. Waiting is not an option; planning and  implementation must begin now:  Y Governments and companies should conduct a proactively managed decline of the  fossil fuel industry and ensure a just transition for the workers and communities that  depend on it.  A flare burns near a hydraulic fracturing drilling tower in rural Weld County in northern Colorado,  the most intensively fracked area in the United States.    Aerial view of seismic lines and a tar sands mine in the  Boreal forest north of Fort McMurray, northern Alberta.  ©Jiri Rezac/Greenpeace  Burning of fossil fuels – oil, gas and coal –  is driving one of the biggest challenges  facing the world today: climate change.  Extreme weather events, rising oceans,  and record setting temperatures are  already wreaking havoc on hundreds of  millions of lives and livelihoods around the  world. In the absence of strong action to  reduce emissions, these impacts will get  significantly worse throughout the course  of the twenty-first Century: 1  Y A large proportion of the earth’s species  faces increased risk of extinction, as  many cannot adapt or migrate as fast  as the climate changes. Lost species will  never return.  Y Crop yields will be severely reduced,  potentially causing hunger on a mass  scale. The Intergovernmental Panel on  Climate Change (IPCC) reports a one-in-five chance (in terms of proportion of  model projections) that yields of wheat,  corn, rice and soy will decrease by more  than 50% by 2100, and a further one-in-five  chance that they will decrease by  between 25% and 50%: in either case the  consequences would be catastrophic.  Y Water supplies too will become stressed,  especially in dry and tropical regions.  Y Cities will increasingly be hit by storms  and extreme precipitation, inland and  coastal flooding, landslides, air pollution,  drought, water scarcity, sea level rise and  storm surges.  This report sets out the decisions and  actions that can be taken now to avoid  the worst of these impacts on lives and  livelihoods, on economies and ecosystems.  WELL BELOW 2°C, AND  AIMING FOR 1.5°C  During the first decade of the twenty-first  century, 2°C of warming above pre-industrial  levels was often seen as a “guardrail” of a  safe climate. Since then, new findings have  indicated that view to be too optimistic.  Runaway climate change – in which feedback  loops drive ever-worsening climate change,  regardless of human activities – are now  seen as a risk even at 2°C of warming.2  A two-year review within the United Nations  Framework Convention on Climate Change  (UNFCCC), based on inputs from scientists  and other experts, summarized the evolving  understanding: “The ‘guardrail’ concept, in  which up to 2°C of warming is considered  safe, is inadequate and would therefore be  better seen as an upper limit, a defense line  that needs to be stringently defended, while  less warming would be preferable.”3  There has been limited study of specific  climate impacts at 1.5°C, but some initial  findings suggest significantly lower  risks than at 2°C. Bruce Campbell of  the Consultative Group for International  Agricultural Research (CGIAR) estimates  that 2°C of warming could reduce African  maize yields by 50% compared to 1.5°C  of warming,4 while a recent assessment  by Carl-Friedrich Schleussner and others  identified several differential impacts  between 1.5°C and 2°C of warming:5  Y Heat extremes would become both more  frequent and of longer duration at 2°C  than at 1.5°C.  Y Reductions in water availability for the  Mediterranean region would nearly double  from 9% to 17% between 1.5°C and 2°C,  and the projected lengthening of regional  dry spells would increase from 7% to 11%.  Y Wheat yields would be reduced by 15%  at 2°C compared to 9% at 1.5°C in a best  estimate; the reduction could be as bad  as 42% at 2°C versus 25% at 1.5°C.  Y The difference between 1.5°C and 2°C  is likely to be decisive for the survival of  tropical coral reefs.  For these reasons – and due to the moral call  from small island states and other vulnerable  nations – governments meeting in Paris  set more ambitious goals than at previous  UNFCCC meetings. The Paris Agreement  established the goal of “holding the increase  in global average temperature to well below  2°C above preindustrial levels and pursuing  efforts to limit the temperature increase to  1.5°C above preindustrial levels.”6  Still, the specific commitments that  governments made in Paris were not  sufficient to deliver these long-term goals.  The Climate Action Tracker estimates that  current global commitments (as stated in  countries’ Intended Nationally Determined  Contributions to the UNFCCC) would  result in 2.7°C of warming by the end of the  century.7 In this report we explore what is  necessary to actually meet the Paris goals.  1. CLIMATE SCIENCE  AND CARBON  BUDGETS  e Examples include release of methane due to melting permafrost or accelerated dieback of Amazon rainforest.    Box 1: Carbon Budgets and Other Greenhouse Gases  The carbon budgets concept applies to CO2, because of the  way it accumulates in the atmosphere over many decades. The  budgets concept cannot be used in the same way to account for  other greenhouse gases, which have a more complex warming  effect because they do not last for as long in the atmosphere.  Methane is the most important of these other gases.  In the short term, methane is a much more potent greenhouse  gas than CO2. However, because methane molecules break down  after an average of twelve years, their direct warming effect  occurs only during those years after they are emitted, while they  are still present in the atmosphere. Methane also has indirect  effects lasting beyond twelve years, due to feedback loops in  the climate system.g Because these loops do not follow a linear  relationship with cumulative emissions, they cannot be described  using carbon budgets.  For these reasons, carbon budgets as discussed in this report  relate only to CO2. However, other greenhouse gases are factored  in when the sizes of CO2 budgets are calculated. Assumptions are  made about what other gases’ future emissions will be, and so  if those assumptions change, then the sizes of carbon budgets  change. Recent studies have indicated that methane leakage  rates from natural gas facilities in the United States are much  higher than previously thought, especially as a result of hydraulic  fracturing, or “fracking.”16 Such changed assumptions may  require CO2 budgets to be revised downward, which would allow  for less CO2 to be emitted.  CARBON BUDGETS  Many existing analyses of the energy  transition start from the current energy  system, and attempt to plot what they  consider pragmatic rates of change from the  status quo. In some cases, such an approach  fails to deliver the emissions reductions  needed. In that vein, oil companies have  often used their energy forecasts to claim  that preventing dangerous climate change is  simply impossible:  Y BP: “Emissions [will] remain well above  the path recommended by scientists.” 8  Y Shell: “We also do not see governments  taking the steps now that are consistent  with the 2°C scenario.”9  Y ExxonMobil: “It is difficult to envision  governments choosing this [low carbon]  path.”In this report we take the opposite  approach: we start from climate limits  and translate into what needs to happen  to the energy system in order to achieve  them. We find that what is necessary is also  achievable.  We know from atmospheric physics that  the key factor determining the extent of  global warming is the cumulative amount  of carbon dioxide (CO2) emissions over  time.11 Because CO2 stays in the atmosphere  for centuries, it has been accumulating for  many decades and continues to do so.12 To  keep warming within any particular limit –  all else being equal – there is a maximum  cumulative amount of CO2 that may be  emitted. (Non-CO2 greenhouse gases are  treated differently – see Box 1)  In the same way that an individual, business,  or government has a budget corresponding  to the resources they have, how long they  need them to last, and the consequences of  debt or deficit, a carbon budget does the  same for greenhouse gas pollution. This is  an important and helpful way to understand  what we can afford to burn when it  comes to fossil fuels (and other sources of  emissions), and to drive conversations about  the most effective and fairest ways to divide  the budget between regions and types of  fossil fuels.  In this report we analyze the carbon  budgets calculated by the IPCC, to examine  their implications for the energy system. We  consider two climate limits: a likely chance  (66%) of limiting global warming to below  2°C, and a medium chance (50%) of limiting  it to below 1.5°C. These budgets are shown  in Table 1, deducting emissions that have  occurred since the IPCC compiled them.  Some scenarios and analyses, such as the  International Energy Agency’s 450 Scenario,  are based on a 50% chance of staying below  2°C of warming.13 Since 2°C is considered an  absolute limit beyond which severe dangers  occur, these 50% odds may be considered  imprudent; hence other analyses such as  United Nations Environment Programme’s  annual Emissions Gap report use the  budget for delivering a 66% chance of  avoiding those dangers, as do we in this  report.f However, we use a 50% chance of  reaching 1.5°C because it has been set as  an aspirational goal in the Paris Agreement,  rather than an absolute maximum.    Table 1: Global Carbon Budgets for Likely Chance of 2°C and Medium Chance of 1.5°C  f There is an argument on that basis that we should require a better than 66% of staying below 2°C – a 33% chance of failure is frightening, given the severity of what failure actually  means. The IPCC provides budgets only for 33%, 50%, and 66%, partly as a relic of earlier decisions on how to quantify English-language terms such as “likely” and “unlikely.”  While some scientists have calculated carbon budgets that would give 80% or 90% probabilities, in this report we use the IPCC budgets, as they are the most-reviewed and most authoritative  options. However, we do so with the following proviso: to be more confident of staying below 2°C, budgets would be smaller and require more dramatic action than  outlined here.  g For example, short-term warming caused by methane’s direct greenhouse effect may cause ice to melt, reducing the extent to which solar radiation is reflected, and hence leading  to greater absorption of heat, even beyond the methane’s atmospheric lifetime.    URGENT EMISSIONS CUTS  To put the carbon budget numbers in  context, we can compare them with current  rates of emissions.  We see from Table 2 that reducing  emissions is urgent: at current rates of  emissions, the carbon budget for a likely  chance of limiting warming to 2°C will be  fully exhausted by 2037, and by 2025 for a  medium chance at 1.5°C.  For the world to stay within either of these  temperature limits, rapid emissions cuts  are required. Figure 1 shows a range of  scenarios for emissions pathways that  would lead to achieving the likely chance of  2°C or medium chance of 1.5°C outcomes.  For 2°C, emissions need to reach net zero  by around 2070, and for 1.5°C they must do  so by 2050 – and in both cases they must  fall steeply, starting immediately.  Note that these scenarios assume that  “negative emissions” technology will occur  in the second half of the century, through  approaches such as bioenergy with carbon  capture and storage or direct air capture. If  we want to avoid depending on unproven  technology becoming available, emissions  would need to be reduced even more  rapidly.    CLIMATE SCIENCE AND CARBON BUDGETS BOX 2: A History of Carbon Budget Analyses  This report continues a tradition of work by scientists and  campaigners showing how global carbon budgets limit the  amount of fossil fuels that can safely be extracted and burned.  It has been known for more than 20 years that cumulative  emissions of CO2 are a key determinant of how much the planet  warms. The IPCC’s Second Assessment Report in 1995 observed  that in climate models all pathways leading to a particular  temperature outcome had similar cumulative emissions.Indeed, the notion of carbon budgets goes back at least to  the early 1990s.20 Further scientific study has developed our  understanding of how this works in relation to the carbon cycle,  forming a major theme in the IPCC’s Fifth Assessment Report in  2013-14.  The pioneering step was taken by Bill Hare, then Climate Policy  Director of Greenpeace, in what he called the 'carbon logic'.  His 1997 paper, “Fossil Fuels and Climate Protection” showed  that if burned, the fossil fuel reserves that were known at that  time would release at least four times as much CO2 as could be  afforded while keeping warming below 1°C, or twice as much  as the budget to keep below 2°C.21 Several campaign groups  (including Greenpeace, Oilwatch, Rainforest Action Network,  Project Underground, and Amazon Watch) used the analysis to  argue that exploration for new reserves should be stopped, but it  was many more years before such calls started to gain traction.  In 2009, an influential paper was published in the journal Nature  by Malte Meinshausen and seven co-authors (including Hare,  who by then worked with Meinshausen at the Potsdam Institute  for Climate Impact Research). They found that only 43% of the  world’s fossil fuels could be burned before 2050 if the world was  to have a 50% chance of keeping warming below 2°C, or 27% of  reserves for a 75% chance.Based on Meinshausen’s research, in 2011 the Carbon Tracker  Initiative published a report coining the term 'unburnable carbon'  and describing its potential consequences for financial markets.Carbon Tracker continues to examine the implications of  stranded assets, which are long-term fossil fuel investments that  will fail to generate returns because they were made assuming  the world will not sufficiently act to address climate change.  Bill McKibben brought this analysis to a wider audience in 2012 in  an article in Rolling Stone entitled “Global Warming’s Terrifying  New Math.” In it, he argued that three simple numbers – the 2°C  limit, the 565 Gt CO2 budget for an 80% chance of staying within  the limit, and the 2,795 Gt CO2 of fossil fuel reserves – added up  to global catastrophe.24 The following year, Mike Berners-Lee and  Duncan Clark published an analysis of reserves versus carbon  budgets in a book, "The Burning Question".  In 2015, Christophe McGlade and Paul Ekins assessed which  reserves might be left unburned if emissions were constrained  within carbon budgets through an escalating carbon price.  Their paper in Nature concluded that 88% of global coal reserves  should remain unburned for a 50% chance of staying below  2°C. Even after assuming significant development of CCS, this  proportion dropped to just 82% of global coal reserves. 75%  of Canada’s tar sands would have to remain unburned, or 74%  with CCS.This report is inspired by that history of earlier work, and aims  to build on it by turning the focus to reserves in fields and mines  that are already operating.    FOSSIL FUEL RESERVES  After a company finds and then develops a  deposit of oil, gas, or coal, it will generally  extract the deposit over a period of several  decades (see Figure 4 on page 20). Reserves  are the quantity of known oil, gas, or coal  that can be extracted in the coming years,  with current technology and in current  economic conditions.h  In Figure 2 we compare carbon budgets  with fossil fuel reserves, echoing earlier work  to translate climate limits into energy limits  (see Box 2). For oil and gas, both proven  and probable reserves are shown, while for  coal only proven reserves are shown (see  Appendix 1).i  We see that for a likely chance of keeping  warming below 2°C, 68% of reserves must  remain in the ground. For a medium chance  of limiting warming to 1.5°C, 85% of reserves  must remain underground.  This conclusion is based on an assumption  that carbon capture and storage (CCS)  is not widely deployed. CCS is a process  in which some of the CO2 released from  burning fossil fuels is captured, compressed,  and stored underground in deep geological  reservoirs – thus enabling fossil fuels to be  burned without releasing all of their carbon  into the atmosphere. The problem is that  the technology needed is far from proven:  it has been deployed only in a few pilot  settings, and without significant success (see  Appendix 3); meanwhile, there are reasons to  believe its costs may remain prohibitive, and  questions about its environmental safety.  If CCS is eventually proven and deployed, it  might provide a welcome means of further  lowering emissions. However, we take the  view that it would not be prudent to be  dependent on an uncertain technology to  avoid dangerous climate change; a much  safer approach is to ensure that emissions  are reduced in the first place by reducing  fossil fuel use and moving the economy  to clean energy. Therefore, we apply that  assumption throughout this report.j  Figure 2: Global Fossil Fuel Reserves Compared to Carbon Budgets for Likely Chance of 2°C and Medium Chance of 1.5°Ch Reserves are a subset of resources, which are an estimate of all the oil, gas, or coal that might one day be extracted. There are two criteria that define reserves:  (i) They have been identified – they have a specified location and grade/type (whereas resources also include those that are expected or postulated to exist, based on geological  understanding)  (ii) They can be extracted with currently available technology and under current economic conditions (whereas resources also include those that rely on speculative future technologies  or commodity prices)i An overview of government-reported data for nine countries that together account for 60% of proven coal reserves suggests additional probable reserves of around 350 Gt of coal  in those countries, equivalent to 885 Gt of CO2. However, coal data is plagued by unreliability and inconsistent definitions, so this estimate should be taken with caution.j As noted, we are taking a different approach from the IEA’s 450 Scenario, which assumes large-scale CCS will become available, hence requiring only modest reductions in fossil  fuel usage while having a 50% chance of staying within 2°C.    CLIMATE SCIENCE AND CARBON BUDGETS Excavators pile up coal on a quay at the Port of Lianyungang in  Lianyungang city, east China’s Jiangsu province, 10 November 2013.  © Associated Press, Wang Chun.  We have seen that existing fossil fuel  reserves considerably exceed both the  2°C and 1.5°C carbon budgets. It follows  that exploration for new fossil fuel reserves  is at best a waste of money and at worst  very dangerous. However, ceasing  exploration is not enough, as that still  leaves much more fossil fuel than can  safely be burned.  DEVELOPED RESERVES  We now turn to the question of how much  room exists within the carbon budgets for  development of new oil fields, gas fields,  and coal mines.  Figure 3 explains three categories of fossil  fuels in the ground:  Y Resources that might one day be  extracted, some of which are  geologically “expected” but yet to  be actually found.  Y Reserves that are known and extractable  using today’s technologies and in today’s  economic conditions.  Y Developed Reserves that can currently  be extracted from oil fields, gas  fields and coal mines that are already  operating – for which the wells have  been drilled and the pits dug, and where  the pipelines, processing facilities,  railways, and export terminals have been  constructed.  We focus on the smallest of these three  measures: ‘developed reserves’. If no new  fields or mines are developed, production  of each fossil fuel will decline over time  as existing fields and mines are depleted,  eventually reaching zero. A finite amount  of cumulative production would thus occur  with no new development, which we have  estimated in Table 3.  2. ENOUGH OIL, GAS,  AND COAL ALREADY  IN PRODUCTION    What exists, ultimately recoverable  (incl. with future technology).  What is known, economically recoverable now.  What is known and recoverable in  currently operating fields and mines.  drill wells, dig mines,  build infrastructure  explore, develop technology    18 ENOUGH OIL, GAS AND COAL ALREADY IN PRODUCTION  For oil and gas fields, we use data from  Rystad Energy’s UCube, a database of  upstream oil and gas projects.29 Rystad  creates this data using a combination  of company reports, regulatory information,  and modeling. We have included fields  that are currently being developed – for  which shovels are in the ground – as well  as those already producing, as the under-construction  ones are “committed” in a  similar sense. Because the estimates of  reserves in existing fields are sensitive  to oil and gas prices, we have used  Rystad’s base case, which projects the  prices Rystad considers most likely  over coming years.  Rystad provides data at the level of an  “asset”, which roughly divides the oil and  gas universe into units for which a separate  investment decision is made, based on its  assessed profitability. For this reason, we  do not count the reserves that would be  unlocked in future development phases  of a producing field as “developed.” For  example, we count the 3.6 billion barrels  of oil that can be extracted with existing  infrastructure on BP’s Mad Dog field in the  Gulf of Mexico as developed, but not the  further 10.7 billion barrels that would be  unlocked by its planned Mad Dog Phase  2 development, which would involve  additional infrastructure investments.  For coal mines, we use estimates from the  International Energy Agency (IEA), which  are comprised of data from various sources  combined with the IEA’s own analysis.It should be noted that available data for  coal is generally of poorer quality than for  oil and gas (see Appendix 1). Data is not  available for coal mines under construction.  Table 3: Developed Reserves and CO2 Emissions, from Existing and Under-Construction Global Oil and Gas Fields, and Existing Coal MinesReserves Emissions    Figure 5 compares developed reserves  with the carbon budgets. In addition to  emissions from energy (the burning of the  three fossil fuels), we must also consider  two other sources of emissions:  Y Land use, especially changes in forest  cover and agricultural uses;  Y Cement manufacture, where aside from  any energy usage, CO2 is released in the  calcination reaction that is fundamental  to cement production.k  In both cases, we use relatively optimistic  projections of emissions this century,  assuming climate action, while noting that  these sit within a wide range of projections,  from those assuming business-as-usual  to those involving speculative new  technologies. This range is shown in  Table 4 (more details in Appendix 2). There  is considerable variation in modelled land  use emissions.l If emissions from these two  sources are not reduced to zero by the end  of this century, they could occupy a larger  share of the remaining carbon budgets,  leaving less for fossil fuel emissions.  It can be seen from Figure 5 that (in the  absence of CCS):  Y The emissions from existing fossil fuel  fields and mines exceed the 2°C carbon  budget.  A recent study by Alex Pfeiffer and  colleagues at Oxford University found that  the “2°C capital stock” of power plants  will be reached in 2017, by projecting the  emissions from power plants over their full  40-year lifespans. In other words, if any  more gas or coal plants are built after next  year, others will have to be retired before  the end of their design lives, in order for  the world to have a 50% chance of staying  below the 2°C limit (for a 66% chance of  2°C, that capital stock was reached in 2009,  meaning early retirements are already  required).32 We have reached a similar  conclusion for the capital stock in fossil  fuel extraction.  NO MORE FOSSIL FUELS  In 2015, President of Kiribati Anote Tong  wrote to other national leaders urging an  end to the development of new coal mines,  “as an essential initial step in our collective  global action against climate change”.As a low-lying island in the Pacific, Kiribati is  a nation whose very existence is threatened.  Our analysis in this report supports his call,  and extends it further.  If we are to stay within the agreed climate  limits and avoid the dangers that more  severe warming would cause, the fossil fuels  in fields that have already been developed  exceed our global carbon budget.  Therefore, we conclude that:  Y No new oil fields, gas fields, or coal mines  should be developed anywhere in the  world, beyond those that are already in  use or under construction.m  Y Similarly, no new transportation  infrastructure – such as pipelines, export  terminals, and rail facilities – should be  built to facilitate new field and mine  development (this does not preclude  replacing existing infrastructure such as  an old, leaky pipeline).Governments and companies might argue  that early closure of coal could make space  for new development of oil and gas. This  substitution argument might have worked  if the total developed reserves were  equivalent to well below 2°C or 1.5°C. But  instead, Figure 5 shows that developed  reserves exceed the 2°C carbon budget  and significantly exceed the 1.5°C budget.  Furthermore:  Y Oil and gas emissions alone exceed the  1.5°C budget.  If governments are serious about keeping  warming well below 2°C and aiming for  1.5°C, no new oil or gas development would  be permitted, even if coal, cement, and  deforestation were stopped overnight.  LEAST-COST APPROACHES  Many analyses of emissions pathways and  climate solutions assess the “least-cost”  routes to achieving climate targets.n Such  an analysis – with the same targets we  have used in this report – might not lead to  the conclusion that no new fields or mines  should be developed. Although developed  reserves will often be cheaper to extract  than new reserves because capital has  already been spent, that is not always  the case. A new Saudi oil field may cost  less to develop and operate than simply  maintaining production from an existing  Venezuelan heavy oil field, for example.  In optimizing the global economics, a least-cost  approach might suggest that rather  than precluding new development, we  should instead close the Venezuelan field  early and open the Saudi one. In this report  we take a different approach.  There are two rationales for using least-cost  models to assess the best way of achieving  a given climate target: predictively,  assuming a markets-based mechanism  for delivering change; or normatively, on  grounds that the least total cost implies the  greatest net benefit to humanity.  As it relates to this report, the predictive role  will hold only if we expect that sufficiently  strict market-based policies will be put  in place to achieve climate goals. In the  absence of these policies, the predictive role  is lost. Those policies do not currently exist;  and in fact, in Section 4 we will argue that  market-based, demand-side policies alone  may not be enough to transform the energy  system to the extent climate limits require.  k Calcium carbonate (limestone) is heated to break it into carbon dioxide and calcium oxide, the largest ingredient used to make cement clinker: CaCO3 → CaO + CO2. The heat may  come from coal or gas, but those emissions are counted within the energy total: the additional component here is the CO2 from the calcination reaction.  l Many scenarios include significant negative emissions, from bioenergy with CCS (BECCS), biochar, and afforestation. In this report, we have based our conclusions on an assumption  that CCS is not deployed at scale, based on unpromising experience to date (see Appendix 3). Extending this precautionary assumption could potentially increase the assumed land  use emissions, and reduce the share of carbon budgets available for fossil fuels.  m It should be noted that we have not included probable reserves of coal, due to lack of data and for the other reasons listed in Appendix 1. So more precisely, our conclusion is that  coal mines should not continue producing beyond their proven reserves. Similarly, if new technology enabled greater recovery from existing oil and gas fields, further restraint would  be needed.  n They commonly do so using an integrated assessment model, which combines both physical effects of emissions in the climate system, and economic effects of energy in the  economy. Such models are used to generate the emissions scenarios featured in IPCC reports, such as those shown in Figure 1.  20 ENOUGH OIL, GAS AND COAL ALREADY IN PRODUCTION  Table 4: Assumed 2015 to 2100 Emissions from Land Use and Non-Energy Emissions from Cement Manufacture (see Appendix 2 for details)  Gt CO2 Assumed Base Case Range  Land Use 21 -206 to Cement Manufacture 162 150 to 2  Figure 5: Emissions from Developed Reserves, Compared to Carbon Budgets for Likely Chance of 2°C and Medium Chance of 1.5°C  Sources: Rystad Energy, IEA, World Energy Council, IPCC  ENOUGH OIL, GAS AND COAL ALREADY IN PRODUCTION Examining the normative rationale, we run  into the important question of how the  climate goal is to be achieved. It is a sad  reflection on climate politics that leaders  find it easy to make principled or pragmatic  arguments for why others should take  action, but much harder to see arguments  for why they should do so themselves. No  government seems to need much excuse to  carry on extracting or burning fossil fuels:  the logic leaps quickly from “someone can  extract if conditions ABC are met” to “I can  extract as much as I like.” This is one reason  why we focus on overall global limits.  Since political action is required, we  should look for solutions that are not just  economically optimized, but politically  optimized. Politically, it is much more  difficult to demand the loss of physical  capital – on which dollars have been spent,  and steel and concrete installed – than to  relinquish the future hope of benefits from  untapped reserves. Shutting an existing  asset leads to an investor losing money,  and if a government shuts it by decree the  investor will demand compensation. That  lost money is a powerful disincentive for  all parties involved. In contrast, stopping  plans for the construction of unbuilt  facilities mostly involves the loss of potential  future income, since the amount spent on  exploration is relatively small.  Similarly, existing jobs held by specific  people generally carry more political weight  than the promise of future jobs. This can  even be the case when policy decisions may  lead to more jobs than the present ones that  would be lost. We will examine this in more  detail in Section 4 and 5.  Mountaintop removal coal mining on Cherry Pond  and Kayford mountains in West Virginia 2012.  ©Wade Payne/Greenpeace.  THE FRONT LINES OF  EXPANSION  The consequence of our analysis is that no  new extractive or facilitating infrastructure  should be built anywhere in the world. We  identify here the countries where the most  expansion is proposed. If these expansions  go ahead, they could be the worst culprits  in tipping the world over the edge.  (i) Coal  The world’s largest and fifth-largest coal  producers, China and Indonesia, have  declared moratoria on new coal mine  development. The second-largest producer,  the United States, has implemented a  limited moratorium on new coal mines on  public lands. These three countries account  for roughly two-thirds of the world’s coal  production (or 60%, if US production  on non-federal lands is excluded).The first priority must be to make these  moratoria permanent, and to extend the  U.S. moratorium to all coal mining in the  country.  The two countries that are currently  proceeding with major coal mining  development are Australia and India:  Y Australia: Nine coal mines are proposed  in the Galilee Basin in Queensland. They  would have combined peak production  of 330 Mt of coal per year, amounting to  705 Mt CO2 of emissions per year – if this  were a country, it would be the world’s  7th largest emitter.36 Table 5 shows the  six mines that have filed applications  for regulatory approval, with estimated  recovery of 9.6 billion metric tons of  coal over their lifetimes, leading to  24 Gt of CO2 emissions. This would total  6% of the global carbon budget for 1.5°C.  Three further mines – Watarah’s Alpha  North, GVK/Hancock’s Alpha West, and  Vale’s Degulla – have not yet started the  approvals process.  Y India: In 2015, the government of  India set a target of tripling national  coal extraction to 1.5 billion metric tons  per year by 2020, with majority-stateo-wned  Coal India Limited increasing its  extraction to 1 billion metric tons per  year, and other companies increasing  from 120 Mt per year to 500 Mt per  year.38 Most commentators expect  production growth to fall well short  of these goals; the IEA’s projection  of production from existing and new  mines is shown in Figure 6. Data  are not available on the reserves in  new mines.  It should be noted that India has done less  than most countries to cause the climate  problem: despite having 18% of the world’s  population, it has accounted for just 3%  of historical global CO2 emissions.40 And  with per capita GDP of just $1,600, the  country has an urgent need for economic  development. Therefore, many argue with  good justification that it is unreasonable to  expect a country like India to bear an equal  burden of addressing climate change to  those with far greater historic responsibility.  At the same time, it is difficult to see how  the world can avoid dangerous climate  change if this coal expansion goes ahead.  The solution could be a generous support  package, primarily provided by the wealthy  countries that are most responsible for  climate change, including climate finance  and technology transfer, to help India    Mtce Existing mines Brown and Greenfield Projects  Figure 6: Projected Indian Coal Production from Existing and  Proposed Mines, in Million Metric Tons of Coal Equivalent  (taking into account low quality)  Figure 7: CO2 Emissions from Largest Proposed New Oil and Gas Developments  Source: Rystad Energy  (ii) Oil and Gas  The largest proposed oil and gas  developments, as projected by Rystad,  are shown in Figure 7.  They comprise:  Y Qatar: Along with partner ExxonMobil,  state-owned Qatar Petroleum plans  to expand gas and oil production on  the massive North field in several new  phases, although this is not expected  until prices increase. The projected 52 Gt  of lifetime CO2 emissions would on their  own exhaust 13% of the 1.5°C budget.  Y United States: Major ongoing fracking  developments, particularly for oil in  North Dakota’s Bakken, and Texas’  Permian and Eagle Ford shales, and  for gas in the Appalachian Basin’s  Marcellus-Utica shale. These are all  proceeding in spite of low prices,  and would add another 51 Gt of  CO2 emissions.  Y Russia: Gazprom proposes several major  gas and oil developments in the Yamal  Peninsula in Arctic northwest Siberia,  though this is not expected until prices  increase. They would add 38 Gt of CO2  emissions.  Y Iran: The Iranian government is currently  preparing an auction of several fields and  exploration blocks to foreign companies,  with initial offerings expected in late  2016 or early 2017. The emissions would  amount to 24 Gt CO2.  Y Canada: Proposed expansion of tar  sands extraction in Alberta depends  on the construction of new pipelines,  which have been stalled due to public  opposition. Two major new pipelines  are currently proposed, one by Kinder  Morgan to the west coast and another  by TransCanada to the east coast.  Projected emissions are 21 Gt CO2.  It can be seen from the chart that new  gas development is as much of a threat  as new oil development.  Proceeding with any of the above oil, gas,  or coal expansions – the world’s largest  new sources of new carbon proposed for  development – could commit us to far more  than 2°C warming.  ENOUGH OIL, GAS AND COAL ALREADY IN PRODUCTION 3. TRIMMING THE  EXCESS  We saw in the previous section that  stopping new fossil fuel construction can  get the world closer to staying below 2°C of  warming, but still is not enough (see Figure  5). Some closure of existing operations will  be required to limit warming to 2°C. To have  a chance of staying below 1.5°C, significant  closures will be needed.  We have noted that closing existing  facilities is more politically difficult than  not building new ones. Stopping new fossil  fuel construction minimizes the number of  existing operations that need to be closed  early. In this section we will consider where  the necessary early shut-downs could or  should take place.  Environmental justice is a priority principle  for considering where to stop fossil fuel  extraction. Extraction should not continue  where it violates the rights of local people  – including indigenous peoples – nor  should it continue where resulting pollution  would cause intolerable health impacts or  seriously damage biodiversity. Fossil fuels  have a long and violent history of being  associated with such violations, stopping  which is important in its own right.  COAL MINES  An obvious candidate for early closure  is the coal sector. Coal accounts for the  largest share of resources, the largest  CO2 emissions intensity, and the largest  emissions per unit of power generated.  Furthermore, coal’s use in power generation  is readily substitutable by renewable  energy,o at least in countries and regions  with mature electrical grids. Coal mining  is also less capital-intensive than oil or gas  extraction, so it is less costly to retire  a coal asset early (although coal mining  is also more labor-intensive, raising issues  of its closure’s impact on workers – see  Section 5).  This does not mean that all coal should be  phased out before any action to restrict  existing oil and gas extraction. Poorer  countries rely disproportionately on coal  for their energy, compared to oil and gas:  coal accounts for 19% of primary energy in  industrialized countries in the Organisation  for Economic Co-operation and  Development (OECD), but 37% of primary  energy in non-OECD countries.42 There is  danger that placing too much emphasis on  coal may put an unfair share of the burden  on the very countries who did least to cause  the climate problem and who have the least  financial and technological capacity to  transform their economies. We will examine  these issues in more detail shortly.  As a starting point, there is little justification  for continued mining or burning of thermal  coal in industrialized countries. Figure 8  shows that the OECD countries extracting  the most coal are the United States,  Australia, Germany, and Poland.  China has already adopted a policy of  closing some existing coal mines, which  will cut its annual production capacity by  between one to two billion metric tons  of coal, depending on implementation.  For comparison, China currently extracts  3.7 billion metric tons, (though these  capacity reductions will not translate to  a 25% to 50% cut in output because of  current overcapacity, but they will reduce  China’s developed reserves.)o Around 17% of coal demand is used in steel production. Research and development is under way to seek to make steel without coal; some projects have instead used forestryderived  charcoal, and earlier-stage technologies include polymers or natural gas. Steel is also highly recyclable, boosting recycling levels from the current 30% could help reduce the  level of demand.  Hard coal Lignite  Figure 8: Partying Like it’s 1899:44 OECD Countries (a) Extracting and (b) Burning the Most Coal (2014 data)  a. Extraction b. Consumption  Source: German Federal Institute for Geosciences & Natural Resources (BGR)  The Shengli open-cast coal mine in Xilinhot, Inner Mongolia, China, 2012.    Some poorer countries see extraction and  use of fossil fuels as a means to achieve  economic empowerment, by providing  either domestic energy or revenue from  exports. At the same time, the greatest  impacts of climate change will fall on poorer  countries which have done the least to cause  the climate problem. A study commissioned  by the Climate Vulnerable Forum estimates  that climate change already causes 400,000  deaths per year, 98% of which occur in  developing countries as a result of increases  in hunger and in communicable diseases.  The current estimated 1.7% reduction in  global gross domestic product (GDP) due  to climate change is disproportionately felt  by the world’s poorest nations, the Least  Developed Countries, whose GDP is being  reduced by 7%.In contrast to the least-cost approaches  discussed in the previous section, the  appropriate question is not only which  solution incurs the least cost to humanity  as a whole: we must also consider a just  distribution of who incurs the cost, such  that each country contributes its fair share  to address the global problem of climate  change.  We have argued that ending the  construction of new fossil fuel infrastructure  is a politically pragmatic approach to  avoiding dangerous climate change. The  problem is that much of current fossil fuel  extraction is located where it may not be  most needed or justified in terms of fairness;  examples include oil, gas, and coal in the  United States and Russia, oil in Canada, oil  in Saudi Arabia, and coal in Australia.  A forthcoming paper by Sivan Kartha and  colleagues at the Stockholm Environment  Institute argues that climate politics contain  an unresolved tension between two  different views of fossil fuel extraction: one  of “extraction as pollution,” and another of  “extraction as [economic] development.”The authors point out that this tension  goes right back to the 1992 UNFCCC  treaty, whose preamble says: “States  have […] the sovereign right to exploit  their own resources pursuant to their own  environmental and developmental policies,  and the responsibility to ensure that  activities within their jurisdiction or control  do not cause damage to the environment of  other States or of areas beyond the limits of  national jurisdiction.”  At the level of emissions, where most  climate policy has historically focused,  this tension has been addressed through  the principles of equity. Most importantly,  the duty to cut emissions rests more with  countries that carry greater responsibility  for causing the problem (those with greater  historic emissions), and with those that  have most capacity to act (the wealthiest  countries).47 Industrialized countries,  which account for just 18% of the world’s  population, are responsible for 60% of all  historical CO2 emissions.Already, important questions arise. How  do these principles of responsibility and  capacity translate to the fossil fuel supply  side? How does the “resource curse” – the  paradox that those countries with the  most natural resources sometimes have  less economic development success –  diminish the developmental value of fossil  fuels, or the historic responsibility for their  extraction? How do demand-side equity  and supply-side equity interrelate?  Oil Change International is working with  the Stockholm Environment Institute on  a paper that more fully explores these  questions and makes concrete proposals  for an equity framework on fossil fuel  Syncrude upgrader plant north of Fort McMurray, Alberta, Canada  supply. For now, it is clear that whatever  the details, the onus of climate action  remains on wealthier countries both to take  action themselves, and to help finance and  facilitate further action in countries that do  not have the resources to do so themselves.  Countries with low levels of fossil fuel  infrastructure have an opportunity to seek  sustainable development along a low-carbon  pathway, leapfrogging to clean energy  without the risk and cost of investing in assets  that may become stranded when climate  action makes them obsolete. In this regard,  it should be noted that some of the greatest  ambition for energy transition comes from  small, poor, and vulnerable countries, such as  Costa Rica, Nicaragua, Djibouti, and Vanuatu  (see Box 3 in Section 5).  However, in return such countries can and  should rightly demand financial support  from industrialized countries, given the  advantages these nations have drawn from  fossil fuels, and conversely the challenges  for poorer countries of integrating variable  renewables in weaker grids. This may include  investment and transfer of technologies  in renewable energy, as well as in other  industries that can provide alternatives to  revenue from fossil fuel extraction.  Other developing countries that have relied  more on fossil fuel extraction or combustion  will similarly require finance to facilitate a  transition, in a manner that protects the  livelihoods of those working in the energy  industry and diversifies their revenue bases  and broader economies. Some fossil fuel  exporters have grappled with the challenge  of how to lift their people out of poverty  while addressing climate change. Ecuador,  for instance, has proposed charging a  tax on oil exports to wealthy countries, to  increase revenue while also incentivizing  lower oil use.  We conclude:  Y To achieve the Paris goals, no new fossil  fuel extraction infrastructure should be  built in any country, rich or poor, except  in extreme cases where there is clearly  no other viable option for providing  energy access.  Y Since rich countries have a greater  responsibility to act, they should provide  finance to poorer countries to help  expand non-carbon energy and drive  economic development, as part of their  fair share of global action. Particularly  important will be financial support to  meet the urgent priority of providing  universal access to energy. Around  the world, over a billion people have  no electricity in their home. Nearly  three billion rely on wood or other  biomass for cooking or heating. Lack  of access to energy in households and  communities threatens the achievement  of nearly every one of the Sustainable  Development Goals that the international  community has set to fight poverty,  hunger, and disease.  Y To stay within our carbon budgets, we  must go further than stopping new  construction: some fossil fuel extraction  assets must be closed before they are  exploited fully. These early shut-downs  should occur predominantly in rich  countries.  Y Extraction should not continue where  it violates the rights of local people  – including indigenous peoples – nor  should it continue where resulting  pollution would cause intolerable  health impacts or seriously damage  biodiversity.    Over the last three decades, climate policy  has focused almost exclusively on limiting  the combustion rather than the extraction  of fossil fuels. While there is a certain  intuitive sense to that, because it is  combustion that physically releases CO2  into the atmosphere, this is far from  the only way to address the problem.  By contrast, ozone protection was  achieved by regulating the production  of chlorofluorocarbons (CFCs) and other  chemicals, rather than trying to influence  their usage and release (for example by  a deodorant tax or quota).  Around 95% of the carbon extracted in oil,  gas, or coal is subsequently burned and  released into the atmosphere as CO2.  As such, the amount of carbon extracted  is roughly equal to the amount that will  be emitted.  There are two routes by which extracted  carbon may not end up in the atmosphere:  Y Small amounts of oil and gas are used  in industrial manufacturing of plastics,  chemicals, fertilizer, and other products.  In 2011, non-combustion uses accounted  for 14% of U.S. oil consumption, 2%  of gas consumption, and 0.1% of coal  consumption – combined, these total  just 6% of the carbon in U.S. fossil fuel  consumption.49 Even in some of these  cases, the carbon still ends up in the  atmosphere as the finished products  decompose.  Y In theory, CO2 emissions could be  captured. However, CCS has barely  been deployed to date, despite  strong advocacy since the 1990s by  the fossil fuel industry. Due to slow  development of the technology, even  if CCS were developed at scale – and  it is questionable whether it could be  at affordable cost – the carbon budget  would only be extended by an estimated  12-14% by 2050 (see Appendix 3).Apart from these exceptions – one of them  minor, and the other currently tiny with  uncertain prospects – any carbon that  is extracted in fossil fuels ends up in the  atmosphere as CO2, as shown in Figure 9.  THREE POSSIBLE FUTURES  We have seen that the reserves in  developed fields and mines exceed the  carbon budget for a likely chance of staying  below 2°C. As a result of this arithmetic,  adding any new resource can logically do  only one of two things (in the absence of  CCS): either add to the excess of emissions  above 2°C, or cause an asset to be stranded  elsewhere.  Source: Oil Change International  Figure 9: The Carbon Supply Chain  4. WHY FOSSIL FUEL  SUPPLY MATTERS  WHY FOSSIL FUEL SUPPLY MATTERS To illustrate what this means, we extend this  basic logic to all new sources of fossil fuel.  There are three scenarios:  Y Managed Decline: No further extraction  infrastructure is developed, existing  fields and mines are depleted over time,  and declining fossil fuel supplies are  replaced with clean alternatives to which  energy workers are redeployed, thus  preventing dangerous climate change.  Y Stranded Assets: Companies continue  to develop new fields and mines,  governments are eventually successful  in restricting emissions, and the resulting  reduction in demand causes many  extraction assets to become uneconomic  and shut down, causing destruction of  capital and large job losses.  Y Climate Chaos: Companies continue to  develop new fields and mines, none are  stranded, and the resulting emissions  take us well beyond 2°C of warming,  with resulting economic and human  catastrophe.  In reality, the scenarios are not mutually  exclusive – the future will be some  combination of all three. However, we know  that each new field or mine must contribute  to one of the following outcomes;  if developed it will either cause stranded  assets and/or dangerous climate change.  Figure 10 illustrates the situation: the  aggregate effect of many such decisions  will be to cause considerable warming  above 2°C, and/or considerable stranding  of assets.  The “managed decline” scenario is explored  in more detail in Section 5. This scenario  requires deliberate policy decisions to cease  development of new fields, mines, and  infrastructure.  If that decision is not made, economic  and political factors will determine the  ratio of “climate chaos” (see Section 1)  to “stranded assets,” which we outline  below. We will then consider how fossil  fuel supply relates to emissions, in order  to better identify the economic and  political factors that arbitrate between  the two scenarios.  STRANDED ASSETS  The concept of stranded assets has entered  the climate debate in the last few years,  especially through the work of Carbon  Tracker Initiative.51 It has been taken up by  many in the financial sector, including banks  such as HSBC52 and Citi,53 and Bank of  England Governor Mark Carney.If we assume that a combination of  government policy and technological  change is successful in limiting warming  to below 2°C or to 1.5°C (and that CCS  prospects do not radically improve),  demand for fossil fuels will fall rapidly,  resulting in a significant decrease in fossil  fuel commodity prices. This in turn will make  many extraction projects unprofitable,  leading to significant losses for investors.  To estimate the scale of stranding, Table  6 gives estimates of projected capital  expenditure over the next 20 years that  will potentially be wasted: over $10 trillion  in new oil fields, gas fields, and coal mines,  and up to $4 trillion in transportation  infrastructure such as pipelines, railways,  and port terminals. (For comparison,  projected ongoing and maintenance capital  expenditure on existing fields and mines is  just over $6 trillion).p  On top of this, there would be stranding of  downstream assets such as power plants  and refineries, the estimation of which is  beyond the scope of this report.  The “stranded assets” scenario is not  something we can regard as a problem  only for financial institutions. It would be  bad news for pension-holders, for those  employed by the fossil fuel industry, and for    Figure 10: Logic Tree of Fossil Fuel Supply vs. Emissions Restrictions  Source: Oil Change International  p Comprising $4.4 trillion on oil, $1.5 trillion on gas and $0.35 trillion on coal  32 WHY FOSSIL FUEL SUPPLY MATTERS  the wider population dependent on a stable  economy. Inevitably, if fossil fuel extraction  is maintained or increased, then staying  within climate limits would require a much  faster pace of reductions than if a managed  decline begins now. This means much more  disruption, more expenditure on faster  development of alternative infrastructure,  and the loss of more jobs at a quicker rate.  “Stranded assets” is not the only scenario  that causes economic loss. On top  of the severe human costs of greater  disease, starvation, and lost homes, the  economic costs of climate change are vast,  encompassing infrastructure damage and  the decline of sectors such as agriculture  and insurance. Estimates since the Stern  Review of 2006 have commonly put the  impact at several percent of global GDP  by the late twenty-first century, and a  more recent study of historic correlations  between temperature and economic  activity suggested that unmitigated climate  change could cause as much as a 20%  reduction in 2100 output.57 Another study  on the impact on financial investments  estimated that $2.5 trillion of financial  assets could be at risk.58 The economic  disruption of climate change would also  cause major job losses across numerous  sectors, and would do so in a chaotic way  that would make transitional support even  more difficult.  In contrast to the combination of these two  costly scenarios, managed decline of fossil  fuel extraction offers a more reasonable  path forward.  SUPPLY AND DEMAND  In recent years, many governments have  adopted the apparently contradictory goals  of reducing emissions while encouraging  increased fossil fuel extraction. In the  absence of CCS, these two goals cannot  both be achieved at a global level: if  emissions are to be reduced, total fossil fuel  consumption must be reduced, which in  turn means that total fossil fuel extraction  must be reduced as well.  When pressed, governments and  companies tend to square the circle  by assuming that it is someone else’s  production that will get constrained and  some other investor’s bet that will go sour.  However, they never specify which other  country or company’s production they  anticipate will be stopped, or why, or how.  Some commentators insist that climate  change should only be addressed on the  demand side.59 But the trouble with this  view is that the act of increasing supply  makes it harder to cut emissions.  (i) More Supply = Lower Price =  Higher Demand  While climate policy has addressed fossil  fuels almost entirely on the demand side,  there has been an implicit assumption  that markets will then simply allocate the  aggregate demand between suppliers.  However, this is not how energy markets  work.Over the history of the modern energy  industry, there have been times when  demand has led events, and times when  supply has done so. For an illustration  of supply leading the way, consider the  present-day situation. U.S. oil extraction  expanded from 6.8 million barrels per  day (mbd) in 2010 to 11.7 mbd in 2014,stimulating a fall in price, which was  exacerbated when the Organization of the  Petroleum Exporting Countries (OPEC)  decided in November 2014 not to cut its  production to compensate. The resulting  low oil prices led to global oil demand  growing at the fastest pace in five years,and to the fastest increase in U.S. gasoline  consumption since 1978.Table 6: Potential for Asset Stranding: Projected (Public and Private) Capital Expenditures on New Fields and Mines, 2014-35 (2012 Dollars)  Sources: International Energy Agency, Rystad UCube  WHY FOSSIL FUEL SUPPLY MATTERS This should not be surprising, as it is what  basic economic theory tells us: supply does  not simply passively match demand, but  interacts with it in dynamic equilibrium.q  Figure 11 shows how supply and demand  interact: the actual quantity consumed  and produced is determined by the point  where the two lines cross. A policy designed  to increase extraction or lower its costs  – in this example, weak environmental  regulation of hydraulic fracturing in the  United States – will move the supply curve  to the right and/or downward. The resulting  new equilibrium has a lower price and a  higher quantity. In short, the increase of  supply has also increased consumption, and  thereby emissions.  (ii) Lock-In of Production  Once a field or mine has been developed,  it will generally keep producing. In other  words, the act of developing it locks in  future production. This is because once  capital has been expended, an investor  has strong incentives to avoid letting the  asset become stranded. This is illustrated  in Figure 12, where cash flow is negative  in the early phase as capital is invested.  The project only receives income once oil  production begins, after three years. In the  higher-price scenario, it takes a further nine  years to pay back the invested capital, and  the project finally begins making a profit  around Year Twelve. In the lower-price  scenario, the project never breaks even.  If the company knew beforehand – in Year  Zero – that the price would follow the  lower path, it would not move ahead with  the project. But once the project has been  developed, the economic incentives push  for continued production even if it means a  long-term loss on the capital invested, since  closing down would lead to an even greater  loss. As long as the red curve is rising in  Figure 12, continued production reduces the  ultimate loss. It is only if the price received  is less than the marginal operating cost (the  curve bends downward) that it is better to  stop before losses increase.    Figure 11: Impact of Policy to Encourage Supply on Supply / Demand Equilibrium In sum, a company will not proceed with a  new project if commodity prices are less  than the total operating and capital costs,  but will close down an-already developed  project only if prices hit the much lower  threshold of marginal operating costs. In  other words, any given action to reduce  demand becomes less effective as soon as  extraction projects have been developed  and operation is ongoing.  (iii) Perverse Political Effects  As well as the perverse economic impacts  of increasing fossil fuel supply, there are also  perverse political impacts. Governments  tend to act more strongly to protect existing  industries than to stimulate future ones,  because of the political clout of real jobs  held by identifiable people (as opposed  to abstract numbers), and because of the  lobbying power of dominant industries.  When fossil fuel prices are low,  governments often feel political pressure  to reduce taxes on fossil fuel production or  provide other subsidies to keep companies  producing. For example, the United  Kingdom cut the highest tax rate on North  Sea oil production from 80% to 68% in  2015 and again to 40% in 2016.64 Noting  declining profitability since 2011 (when coal  prices began their slide), the Indonesian  Coal Mining Association is calling for the  government to guarantee cost-based prices  in order to enable continued expansion.The effect of subsidies expanding or  maintaining supply translates through the  price mechanism again into increasing  demand and increased emissions.  q This mechanism breaks down if there is a perfect swing producer, which adjusts its own supply to maintain equilibrium at a certain level. Even before 2014, OPEC’s ability to act was  in reality limited by physical, political and economic factors (if it had been a perfect swing producer, the price would not have fluctuated). Now that Saudi Arabia and OPEC have  decided not to fulfil that role even partially, and instead to maximize their production, the market reflects this model.  34 WHY FOSSIL FUEL SUPPLY MATTERS   Cash flow is the total income minus total (undepreciated) expenditure in any year. Discounting adjusts this to account for the time value of money, reflecting both the cost of capital  and the opportunity cost of not investing it elsewhere.    Twenty-five years of climate politics has  thoroughly embedded the notion that  climate change should be addressed at the  point of emissions, while the supply of fossil  fuels should be left to the market. That view  is now no longer supportable (if in fact it  ever was). Our analysis indicates a hard limit  on the amount of fossil fuels that can be  extracted, pointing to an intervention that  can only be implemented by governments.  We conclude that:  Y Governments should issue no further  leases or permits for new oil, gas, or coal  extraction projects or transportation  infrastructure.  While this would mark a significant change  in the direction of climate policy, it is also  the least disruptive and least painful option.  As we saw in the previous section, in the  absence of a dramatic turnaround for CCS,  further building of fossil fuel extraction  infrastructure will lead us only to two  possible futures, both of which entail vast  economic and social costs.  What we propose in this report is the  easiest global approach to restraint: when  in a hole, stop digging.  A GRADUAL TRANSITION  Existing fields and mines contain a large  amount of oil, gas, and coal, which will be  extracted over time. Rates of extraction  will decline without development of new  resources and infrastructure, but the decline  is far from precipitous. The fastest decline  will be in fracked shale, where wells produce  for only a few years. Other fields often last  much longer.  Figures 13 and 14 show Rystad’s projection  of oil and gas extraction from existing fields  and those under construction, in its oil price  base cases: extraction (and hence global  supply) would fall by 50% by the early  2030s. Data is not available for coal.  This projection should not be alarming.  Remember that emissions must decline  rapidly, to net zero by 2070, for a likely  chance of staying below 2°C, or by 2050  for a medium chance of staying below  1.5°C (see Figure 1 on page 13). For  emissions to decline, fossil fuel use (and  consequently extraction) must decline at  the same overall rate.  Simply restricting supply alone would lead  to increased prices, potentially making  marginal production in existing fields  and mines viable. The amount ultimately  extracted and emitted would still be lower  (see Figure 11 on page 34), but may not  be as low as carbon budgets allow. A  more powerful policy approach would  be to pursue reductions in supply and  demand simultaneously. As long as the  two remain roughly in sync, prices will  remain more stable, and “leakage” – where  reductions in one country’s extraction are  offset by increased extraction in another  country – will be minimized. The two  policy approaches can also be mutually  reinforcing, as declining supply of fossil  fuels stimulates more private investment in  alternatives, and vice versa.  s A higher price would lead to slower decline, as companies would invest more capital expenditures even in existing fields. Conversely, a lower price would lead to faster decline.  MAKING AN ENERGY TRANSITION HAPPEN BOX 3: The Remarkable Growth in Renewable Energy  Renewable power generation is growing exponentially: wind at  around 20% per year globally, and solar at around 35% per year.Wind generation has more than doubled since 2010, while solar  has doubled nearly three times in that period. Compounded over  many years, these growth rates add up rapidly: if wind and solar  sustained their current global growth rates, they would exceed  current coal and gas power generation in 2029.69 At some point,  growth rates will slow down, but there is no indication that it is  happening yet.  Denmark, a relatively small country, generates 40% of its  electricity from renewables (mainly wind), and is aiming for 100%  renewable generation by 2035.70 In 2015, Germany – the world’s  fourth largest economy – generated nearly one-third of its power  from renewables, primarily wind and solar.Small and large developing countries are moving to renewables  too. Costa Rica produces 99% of its electricity from renewable  sources, including hydro, wind, and geothermal.72 Neighbouring  Nicaragua generates up to 20% of its electricity from wind, and  16% from geothermal.73 Djibouti is aiming for 100% of its energy  to be renewable by 2020, much of it off-grid solar.74 Vanuatu  currently generates 43% of its electricity from renewables, and  aims for 65% by 2020 and 100% by 2030, with much of the  growth coming from grid-connected wind and solar, and off-grid  solar.75 In absolute terms, China is set to overtake the United  States in 2016 as the largest generator of wind and solar power.China is also showing the fastest growth in wind and solar  installations: 2015 was a record year in which its wind capacity  grew by 33.5% and grid connected solar capacity by 73.7%.India has a target of a twenty-fold increase in solar power to 100  GW by 2022, which would take it to more than twice China’s  current level.In many countries, wind and solar are already cost-competitive  with fossil fuel and nuclear power generation. A recent Deutsche  Bank survey of sixty countries found that solar has reached grid  parity in fully half of the countries already.79 And costs are falling  fast. The International Renewable Energy Agency reports that  the levelized cost of electricity from utility-scale solar fell by 58%  between 2010 and 2015, and could fall by a further 59% between  2015 and 2025.New transportation technologies, specifically electric vehicles  (EVs), are also developing fast. Battery costs – a major element  of the price of an EV – are falling quickly, as lithium-ion battery  costs fell 65% from 2010 to 2015.81 Further cost declines and  performance improvements are widely expected, with some  projecting a further 60% cost decline by 2020.82 Financier UBS  predicts that by the early 2020s, the purchase price of an EV will  be only very slightly higher than a petroleum-fueled car, with only  small a fraction of the fuel and maintenance costs.In 2016 and 2017, three different mass-market, long-range electric  car models are being launched in the United States, with dozens  more expected by 2020. China aims to have five million EVs on  the road by 2020, while several European countries (including  Norway, France and Germany) have recently announced that  they to no longer allow sales of petroleum-fueled cars after either  2025 or 2030.An oil storage facility in Linden, New Jersey USA.    Renewable power technologies are not only  possible; they are already in use at scale in  many countries, growing rapidly, and often  cost less than gas or coal generation (see  Box 3). Electric vehicles are at an earlier  stage of development than renewable  power, but may be able to penetrate the  market more rapidly: whereas a power  plant has a typical lifetime of 40 years, cars  generally last for around ten years.  A common objection to renewable energy  relates to the challenges of intermittency.  However, this problem is often overstated.  For example, the chief executive officer  of the northeast Germany electrical grid  says the country can get up to 70% to 80%  wind and solar even without “additional  flexibility options” such as storage.85 A 2012  report by the National Renewable Energy  Laboratory found that with existing storage  capacity, the U.S. grid can handle as much  as 50% wind and solar penetration.86 To go  further, affordable storage solutions are  now emerging, from lithium ion batteries  to compressed air and others. Residential  battery storage systems entered the  mainstream market in the US and Australia  in 2015, and the coming years are also  expected to see increasing deployment of  grid-scale storage.87 The bigger challenges  will be expanding renewable energy in  weaker grids in developing countries,  emphasizing again the importance of  climate finance to facilitate the transition.  We now examine what is needed to  replace depleting fossil fuel extraction,  by comparing the residual oil and gas  demand that will remain while aggressively  moving to clean energy, with natural  depletion of existing oil and gas fields  (as shown in Figures 13 and 14, on page  37). Using a simple model of progressive  electrification of energy-consuming sectors  and progressive conversion of electricity  generation to renewables, we convert the  final energy consumption projected in the  IEA’s 450 Scenario in two scenarios: 50%  renewable energy by 2035 and 80% by  2045. In both we assume a complete phaseout  of  coal usage, except in steel production.  The results are shown in Figure 15 (see  detailed calculation and assumptions in  Appendix 4).We see in the Figure that in 2035, expected  oil and gas production from existing fields  roughly matches the requirement with a  50% renewable energy penetration. Further  depletion to 2045 leaves greater production  than would be required while moving to  80% renewable energy.  Figure 15: Final Energy Consumption by Source With 50% Renewable Penetration in 2035 and 80% in 2045,  Compared to Depletion of Existing Oil and Gas Fields (See Appendix 4)  Sources: IEA, Mark Jacobson et al, Rystad Energy, Oil Change International analysis  Gas Oil Coal Nuclear, Bio & Other Renewable    40 MAKING AN ENERGY TRANSITION HAPPEN  Figure 16: Projected Power Demand and Fuel Source, in Jacobson et al’s Roadmap for 139 Countries  Source: Mark Jacobson et al  Mark Jacobson of Stanford University  and colleagues have developed detailed  roadmaps for how 139 countries could  achieve 80% renewable energy by 2030,  and 100% by 2050, as shown in Figure 16.89  These are much faster rates of conversion  than we have outlined above. For each  country’s projected energy demand  – including electricity, transportation,  heating/cooling, and industry – Jacobson’s  team considers what level of each  renewable energy source would be  required, using only technologies that are  available today. They take into account the  wind, solar and water resource, land area  and infrastructure for each country, and  allow for intermittency. A small proportion  of transportation and industrial energy uses  hydrogen as a fuel carrier.  What Jacobson and his colleagues  have shown is the technical feasibility of  obtaining 100% of energy from wind, water  and solar by 2050, and 80% of it by 2030.  The technology can deliver, and there is  sufficient available resource, while taking  up just 0.25% of the 139-country land area,  mostly in deserts and barren land (plus  a further 0.7% for spacing between wind  turbines, which can be used at the same  time for farmland, ranchland, grazing land,  or open space). They have also shown that  the transformation will create a major net  addition to the number of energy jobs,  compared to continuing with fossil fuels.  Jacobson’s calculations are not just a  theoretical possibility. In a global survey of  1,600 energy professionals by consultancy  DNV GL, nearly half of respondents said  they believed the electricity system they  work in could achieve 70% renewable  generation by 2030, if there were sufficient  political will.How much does all this cost? Over recent  years, estimates of clean energy costs have  been consistently revised downward, while  estimates of the cost of climate change have  been revised upwards. In many parts of the  world, wind and solar are cost-competitive  with gas and coal power generation, and  with fast-falling costs they soon will be  elsewhere as well (see Box 3).  Bloomberg New Energy Finance (BNEF)  estimates that by 2027, it will be as cheap  to build a new wind or solar plant as to  run an existing coal or gas plant. BNEF  projects that to have a 50% chance of  keeping warming to 2°C, $14 trillion of  clean energy investments would be needed  over the next 25 years; however, $9 trillion  would occur even in the absence of policy  intervention.91 While in this report we focus  on achieving a greater probability of staying  below 2°C, and aiming for 1.5°C, which  MAKING AN ENERGY TRANSITION HAPPEN would require a greater proportion of clean  energy, the BNEF estimate gives a useful  ballpark figure. It should be compared with  the projected $14 trillion in new fossil fuel  extraction and transportation (Section 4),  not to mention investment in power plants  and refineries.  As a result of increasing cost-competitiveness,  much new energy  investment is now indeed going into clean  energy. However, the rates of renewable  penetration in Figure 15 – sufficient to  replace fossil fuel decline – are greater  than would occur due to market forces  alone. The point is that policy intervention  is needed to drive investment decisions  solely into clean energy, to build sufficient  institutional capacity to carry out the  investments, and to stop expansion of fossil  fuels. The cost competitiveness shows that  the net cost of those interventions will be  modest, or even negative. We would further  note that one of the biggest barriers to the  transition is the estimated $452 billion G20  countries currently provide in subsidies  every year to fossil fuel extraction.Is such a large-scale transformation  possible, at such a speed? Benjamin  Sovacool of Aarhus University has pointed  to several energy transformations at the  national-level – in both end-use and supply  technologies – that took place on these kind  of timescales, shown in Table 7.93 In several  cases, a concerted and coordinated effort  by government was vital to facilitating the  transition, through subsidies, establishing  pilot programs, retraining workers, and  regulation. A worldwide transition away  from fossil fuels is of course a larger and  more complex undertaking than these  examples, but as Sovacool notes, “previous  transitions may have been accidental or  circumstantial, whereas future transitions  could become more planned and  coordinated, or backed by aggressive social  movements or progressive government  targets.”  We conclude that:  Y Gradual decline of fossil fuel extraction  by depleting existing oil and gas fields  and phasing out coal is replaceable with  existing clean energy technologies, without  major extra cost.      JUST TRANSITION  The implications of limiting global warming  to below either 2°C or 1.5°C are significant.  It will require a fundamental transformation  of the energy industry, beginning  immediately and taking place over the next  three to four decades. There are many  advantages to this transition, even aside  from its necessity to prevent dangerous  climate change:  Y Renewable energy sources generate  power more cheaply than coal or gas in  many parts of the world, and soon will do  so nearly everywhere (see Box 3).  Y Electric vehicles commonly offer higher  performance than internal combustion  engines, and are also expected to be  cheaper within the next five years.  Y Clean energy industries employ many  more people per dollar invested and  per GWh generated than fossil fuel  industries. A study by the United Nations  Industrial Development Organization  found that $1 million creates twice as  many jobs if invested in renewable  energy and energy efficiency as it would  if invested in fossil fuels.94 Meanwhile, the  United Kingdom Energy Research Centre  finds that a GWh of electricity from wind  and solar creates five times as many  jobs on average as a GWh of electricity  generated from gas and coal.Y Reduced fossil fuel pollution will have  massive benefits for health: coal burning  alone is estimated to cause 366,000  deaths per year in China and 100,000  per year in India.Y Some analysts argue that given  diminishing returns from developing  oil and gas at the frontiers, investors  in oil companies would obtain higher  returns from a phased wind-down of  the companies than by their high-cost  continuation.However, the process of transition will not  necessarily be painless for individuals,  companies, regions, and countries. It will  affect fossil fuel energy workers, many of  whom may not have the right skills or be  in the right location to smoothly transition  into clean energy jobs. It will also affect  people working to service fossil-based  utilities and worksites, whose positions are  often more precarious than jobs directly  in energy companies. Many energy jobs  lie in construction rather than operations,  and so in the short term, an end to fossil  fuel construction may lead to a more rapid  decline in job numbers than in volumes of  fossil fuels. Communities may be hit by a  loss of revenue or local economic activity,  and cultural impacts in places where a  community has been long associated with a  particular employer or industry.  Action by governments is therefore  needed to conduct the energy transition  in a way that maximizes the benefits of  climate action while minimizing hardships  for workers and their communities. Trade  unions and others have developed a  framework for a just transition in relation to  climate change, the importance of which  is recognized in the preamble of the Paris  Agreement.98 In 2015 the International  Labour Organization adopted guidelines  on just transition.99 Key elements of a just  transition include:1Y Sound investments in low-emission and  job-rich sectors and technologies.  Y Social dialogue and democratic  consultation of social partners (trade  unions and employers) and other  stakeholders (such as communities).  Y Research and early assessment of the  social and employment impacts of  climate policies.  Y Training and skills development  to support the deployment of new  technologies and foster industrial  change.  Y Social protection alongside active labor  markets policies.  Y Local economic diversification plans  that support decent work and provide  community stability in the transition.  As Jeremy Brecher of Labor Network  for Sustainability points out, all of this  is achievable and has several relevant  precedents in the United States.101 At  the end of World War II, the G.I. Bill of  Rights provided education and training,  loan guarantees for homes, farms, and  businesses, and unemployment pay for  returning veterans. It was vital to their  reintegration into American society and to  the transition to peace. Another military  example was the 2005 Base Realignment  and Closing Commission (BRAC), which  provided communities around closing bases  with planning and economic assistance,  environmental cleanup, community  development grants, and funding for  community services, as well as counselling  and preferential hiring for affected workers.  In the energy sector, the current Obama  Administration Power+ Plan, which offers  support for communities previously  dependent on coal, has many of the  features of a just transition, including  funding for job training, job creation, and  economic diversification.  The job and skill profiles of workers who  could potentially be affected vary widely,  and therefore require different strategies.  For workers currently employed in fossil fuel  extraction or use, incumbent companies  must support workers and either offer  career progress in non-fossil fuel parts  of the company or provide them with  transferable skills to navigate the labor  market with better chances for success.  For communities and workers that depend  indirectly on fossil fuel economic activity,  public authorities must anticipate the need  for new sources of revenue and support  investments to transform their economies.  The most critical questions lie in how  industry and policymakers will conduct  an orderly and managed decline of fossil  fuel extraction, with robust planning for  economic and energy diversification. As  Anabella Rosemberg of the International  Trade Union Confederation writes, “Job  losses are not an automatic consequence  of climate policies, but the consequence  of a lack of investment, social policies, and  anticipation.”1National governments should seek to  stimulate new economic growth in regions  previously dependent on fossil fuel  industries, and in new industries to take  their place. Most importantly, leaving things  until carbon budgets are mostly exhausted  would result in disruptive change that  would be sudden, costly, and painful. By  starting now, the transition can be managed  efficiently and fairly, to the maximum  benefit of everyone involved.  6. CONCLUSION  In the Paris Agreement, 195 governments agreed to limit global warming to “well below  2°C” above pre-industrial levels, and to aim for a temperature increase of not more than  1.5°C. In this report, we have used the concept of carbon budgets, drawn from the Fifth  Assessment Report of the IPCC, to explore what this would mean in practice.  We find that the oil, gas, and coal in already-developed fields and mines (that is, where the  infrastructure has been built) exceeds the amount that can be burned while likely staying  below 2°C, and significantly exceeds the amount that can be burned while staying below  1.5°C. Any new fossil fuel infrastructure that is built would require a corresponding early  retirement of existing infrastructure. Given the political and economic difficulties of closing  down existing facilities, we recommend that:  Y No new fossil fuel extraction or transportation infrastructure should be built worldwide.  Instead, we should allow for the gradual decline of existing operations, over the coming  decades, and invest strongly in clean energy to make up the difference. We have seen that  there is no economic or technical barrier to making this transition over this time frame: the  only requirement is political will.  To minimize the costs of the transition, governments should conduct robust planning for  economic and energy diversification. The principles of just transition should be applied, to  ensure workers and communities benefit from the shift to a clean energy economy, rather  than be harmed by it.  The conclusions in this report will take some by surprise, and cause alarm with others.  They imply serious alterations to the global economy, will be resisted by some of the  most profitable companies ever known, and will necessitate bold and decisive action by  governments on a scale not seen thus far.  But the conclusions are also remarkably straightforward at their core. To keep from burning  more fossil fuels than our atmosphere can withstand, we must stop digging them out of the  ground. With this report, we put forward recommendations on how to go about doing just  that in a sufficient, equitable, economically efficient, and just fashion.  Vehicles work at an open-pit coal mine near Ordos in  northern China’s Inner Mongolia Autonomous Region, 2015.  Since fossil fuel reserves are located  beneath the earth’s surface, estimating  their quantity is based on inherently limited  information drawing on interpretation  and judgment of geological data, as well  as assumptions about economics and  operations. Quantities of reserves are  therefore distinguished by the degree of  confidence in them: proven, probable,  and possible.  The most commonly cited estimates  for reserves in fact refer only to proven  reserves, a quantity defined (where  probabilistic methods are used) as having  a 90% likelihood that the amount actually  recovered will exceed the estimated  amount. 103 This is because the principal  use of the concept of reserves is to help  investors assess the value of a company by  providing an indicator of its future potential  production. For this purpose, the most  relevant estimate is the more certain one,  as it carries less risk.  Since it requires such a high degree of  confidence, the proven reserves figure  understates what can be expected to in  fact be extracted, even based on current  knowledge. For anticipating the future  impact on the climate (or indeed on energy  markets), it is more relevant to consider a  realistic estimate of what will be extracted.  In this report, we therefore also state  probable reserves of oil and gas, taking  proven plus probable to refer to the best  estimate of the quantity that will ultimately  be extracted in the absence of climate  constraints. We interpret this as the mean  (expected) value.t  Contrary to what might then have been  expected, the proven-plus-probable  reserves figures we use in this report  are actually lower than those in the BP  Statistical Review of World Energy, which  claims to give proven reserves. The reason  is that BP takes at face value the amounts  claimed by countries such as Venezuela,  Saudi Arabia, and Canada, whose  measurements lack transparency, are widely  suspected to be inflated, and/or rely on  broader-than-usual definitions of proven  reserves. Rystad Energy – our source of  reserves data – instead makes judgments of  what reserves are realistically extractable.1Estimates of probable reserves are harder  to obtain than of proven. In particular, there  are no reliable data available for probable  reserves of coal, and definitions vary  significantly between countries. Even data  on proven coal reserves is of much poorer  quality than data on oil and gas, for which  there have been efforts to align definitions  and compile global reserves data from  company and government reports.v The IEA  notes that due to the sheer scale of coal  reserves and substitution by gas, there has  been little interest in coal surveys since the  start of the twenty-first century.1The implication is that the quantity of  reserves is a less important determinant of  future production for coal than for oil and  gas (another important underlying factor  is air pollution regulations).108 For these  reasons, in this report we use only proven  reserves for coal.  