OXFAM  RESEARCH BACKGROUNDER  The energy challenge  in sub-Saharan  Africa: A guide for  advocates and policy  makers  Part 1: Generating energy for  sustainable and equitable  development  Nkiruka Avila, Juan Pablo Carvallo, Brittany Shaw, and Daniel M. Kammen  2017  OXFAM    Series editor: Kimberly Pfeifer  Oxfam’s Research Backgrounders are designed to inform and foster discussion  about topics critical to poverty reduction. The series explores a range of issues  on which Oxfam works—all within the broader context of international  development and humanitarian relief. The series was designed to share Oxfam’s  rich research with a wide audience in hopes of fostering thoughtful debate and  discussion. All Backgrounders are available as downloadable PDFs on our  website, , and may be distributed and cited with  proper attribution (please see following page).  Topics of Oxfam’s Research Backgrounders are selected to support Oxfam’s  development objectives or key aspects of our policy work. Each Backgrounder  represents an initial effort by Oxfam to inform the strategic development of our  work, and each is either a literature synthesis or original research, conducted or  commissioned by Oxfam America. All Backgrounders have undergone peer  review.  Oxfam’s Research Backgrounders are not intended as advocacy or campaign  tools; nor do they constitute an expression of Oxfam policy. The views expressed  are those of the authors—not necessarily those of Oxfam. Nonetheless, we  believe this research constitutes a useful body of work for all readers interested  in poverty reduction.    EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  Sub-Saharan Africa, home to more than 950 million people, is the most  electricity-poor region in the world. More than 600 million people lack access to  electricity, and millions more are connected to an unreliable grid that does not  meet their daily energy service needs. Most countries in this region have  electricity access rates of about 20%, and two out of three people lack access to  modern energy services. The average annual electricity consumption in the sub-  Saharan residential sector is 488 kilowatt hours (kWh) per capita—equivalent to  about 5% the consumption of the United States. The International Energy  Agency (IEA) estimates that electricity demand in sub-Saharan Africa grew by  about 35% from 2000 to 2012 to reach 352 terawatt hours (TWh), and it  forecasts the total demand for electricity in Africa to increase at an average rate  of 4% a year through 2040. Demand estimates that include self-generation, such  as diesel generators, report even higher figures: 423 TWh in 2010. To meet this  growing demand, the region will need to significantly expand its installed  generation capacity and make extensive upgrades to the power grid. At the  current pace of electrification and population growth, more than half a billion  people are expected to remain without access to electricity by 2040, and full  electricity access in the region is not estimated to be accomplished until 2080.  Hence, sub-Saharan Africa is burdened with a complex and persistent electricity  gap.  The electricity gap refers to both the supply-demand mismatch in grid-connected  regions and the lack of access in off-grid regions. Closing the electricity gap in  sub-Saharan Africa is a multidimensional challenge with important implications  for how to frame the region’s energy problem as a whole.  Sub-Saharan Africa has high income and wealth inequality, which leads to vast  differences in consumers’ desire and willingness to pay for electricity. Its  countries display large disparities in electricity costs, with South Africa and  Zambia among the lowest, and Djibouti and Gabon among the highest. Access to  electricity is also highly unequal, even among people who are connected to the  grid. Some people cannot afford to consume electricity despite being connected.  Therefore, they cannot consume enough electricity to make use of modern  energy services. They may also suffer disproportionately high levels of service  interruption, with no ability to depend on expensive on-site diesel generators like  wealthier people in the same region. The electronic appliances the region’s  consumers will purchase—many for the first time—will be more efficient than the  current stock in many wealthier economies. Hence, the pace, level, and profile of  electricity demand in sub-Saharan Africa will evolve differently. There are  technological, geographical, cultural, and social distinctions that suggest the   region should define its own target standard of living and type of energy services  to be pursued, rather than comparing itself with wealthier countries.  Persistent electricity scarcity has crippled the region’s economic growth and  prevented it from attaining several of its health and education development goals.  Causes of this scarcity include lack of generation capacity to supply power to  grid-connected regions, absence of proper grid infrastructure to deliver this  power, regulatory impediments to providing steady revenue to maintain and  invest in new generation capacity, and dispersity of population in remote areas.  As of 2012, sub-Saharan Africa’s installed generation capacity was a mere 90  GW—about 0.1 kW per capita—in stark contrast with wealthier economies that  have installed capacities ranging from 1.0 to 3.3 kW per capita. The region’s  inability to provide reliable electricity has led to prolific growth of inefficient and  expensive on-site self-generation in industrial, commercial, and even residential  sectors.  This lack of systematic planning for the power sector has resulted in a system  with high transmission and distribution losses (averaging 18% across the region  when South Africa is excluded), and created a high dependence on large dams  and expensive diesel plants. The region’s dependence on fossil fuel plants  creates a multifaceted problem of supply and price variability, with fuel producers  curtailing supply under low prices and consumers suffering economic losses  during periods of high prices. In addition, climate change is projected to have a  substantial impact on the reliability of hydropower resources in sub-Saharan  Africa. Erratic rainfall patterns and prolonged droughts can reduce hydroelectric  output and force extended outages. While the region contributes the least to  greenhouse gas emissions, it is most vulnerable to climate change impacts such  as droughts and reduced agricultural yields.  This complex challenge presents an opportunity for sub-Saharan countries to  design low-fuel, low-carbon power systems based on wind, geothermal, and  solar technologies and to use responsive and efficient demand management  strategies.  The region is home to abundant fossil and renewable energy sources. The  technical potential for generation capacity is estimated at about 10,000 GW of  solar power, 350 GW of hydroelectricity, and 400 GW of natural gas, totaling  more than 11,000 GW. The limiting factors in the region’s electricity development  are effective technical, financing, and policy mechanisms to enable the  development of these resources. In addition, the region’s lack of grid  infrastructure can be transformed into an opportunity to lead the way toward  better-designed, more efficient, sustainable power systems without being  hindered by legacy carbon-intensive assets. Both private and public stakeholders  have a window of opportunity to determine how best to coordinate energy  solutions at the point of use, mini-grid, and centralized grid levels. Mechanisms  9 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  should be put in place to facilitate grid extension and micro-grid deployment in  order to reach unconnected regions. Utility and tariff structures must be fair,  stable, and sustainable to ensure cost-effective and reliable delivery to end  users, as well as proper maintenance of valuable energy infrastructure.  Filling the electricity gap with renewable sources will entail economic and  environmental trade-offs because of the region’s unique combination of  challenges and opportunities. A promising way to facilitate this development is  through regional power pools that allow countries to aggregate resources and  extend grids across national borders, capitalizing on regional diversity in  resources and demand. Four regional power pools already exist, but only about  7% of electricity is traded across international borders, mostly through the South  African Power Pool. Facilitating increased use of the region’s four power pools  could save more than $50 billion in capital investments in the power sector.  Power pools could also facilitate additional strategies to incorporate large  amounts of variable renewable generation such as the use of existing reservoir  hydropower to provide storage, the deployment of novel chemical and  mechanical storage technologies, and the adoption of widespread demand  response programs across the region.  Designing, testing, and assessing different expansion scenarios for sub-Saharan  Africa is paramount to finding the optimal combination of supply, transmission,  storage, and demand-side resources to fuel development and growth for the  coming decades. Countries need to develop and adopt a host of data-driven  integrated modeling tools for systems-level planning and operation at an  unprecedented scale. Governments need to partner with academic institutions  and private sector stakeholders to produce data in the quality and quantity  required to provide decision makers with the right inputs for these modeling tools.  In this report, we design an open-access power system model and analyze  optimal pathways for expanding supply capacity in two case study countries:  Kenya and Nigeria. We compare the average costs of various expansion  scenarios for achieving reliable and affordable power by 2035 and explore issues  such as integration of variable renewable resources, improvements in electricity  access, impacts of reliability, and the role of decentralized energy resources.  The case studies show that renewables are now cost competitive and that fuels  such as natural gas can play a role in providing system flexibility until grid  storage costs decline. The analysis shows that fuel choices should be considered  cautiously—particularly coal, which is shown to be a costly pathway to  electrification in Kenya and Nigeria. The case studies also show that the scale of  centralized generation expansion required to meet moderate load growth by  2035 is significant compared with historical investments in power systems and  the rate of system expansion in many countries in the region. Current investment  in sub-Saharan electricity systems is about US$8 billion a year. This is   inadequate to overcome the existing infrastructure challenge, to expand access  and coverage, and to meet the growth in demand. The model estimates that  Nigeria will have to install at least an additional 36 GW by 2035 to keep up with  grid-based load growth alone, and Kenya will have to install at least 17 GW. This  is about five times the current operational capacity in each country. Therefore,  achieving full electricity access will require combining many pathways and  strategies, such as synergies between centralized and distributed energy  systems, bolstered financial support and investments, and improved institutional  capacity and management.  Though challenging, these results reveal opportunities to increase the use of  clean energy and build intra- and international cooperation in Africa. While  models only illustrate opportunities, the signs are hopeful that if energy access  and sustainable development are raised as continent-wide priorities, Africa is  primed for an energy transformation. A number of important conclusions emerge  from this assessment.  Key observations are the following:  • While sub-Saharan Africa has significant fossil fuel resources, many of which  are the focus of domestic and international “resource races,” investments in  and use of fossil fuels should be judicious given that   the exploitation of fossil fuels, even in energy-limited countries, often  comes at the expense of the development of sustainable energy sources;  and   decades of experience show that fossil fuel energy development does  little to increase energy access, which is lower in sub-Saharan Africa than  in any other region.  • Africa has exceptional solar, wind, geothermal, and biomass resource  potential, both on a per capita basis and in terms of resource diversity. Africa  could thus achieve high levels of energy services with very low carbon  emissions.  • Advances in smart grids and information and communication technologies  (ICTs) will enable the region to take full advantage of its exceptional  renewable resources.  • Successfully integrating large shares of variable renewable resources will  require high grid flexibility, currently hindered by the difficulty of  operationalizing regional power pools and the high cost of energy storage.  • Operational power pools combined with strategic policies and actionable  targets could quicken the pace of electrification across the region.  11 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  • As these challenges are resolved, fossil fuels, particularly natural gas, will  likely remain a part of the region’s transition to a low-carbon electricity grid.  These observations lead to the following actionable conclusions:  • Lack of data is hindering analysis of future grid designs in many countries in  the region. The development of robust planning tools that have relatively low  data requirements will permit the widest vetting of renewable energy projects  based on their energy, social, and environmental costs and benefits.  • Investment in renewable energy is proving a more sustainable and costeffective  path to meeting Africa’s dual challenges of economic empowerment  and energy access.  • A clean energy path benefits significantly from well-functioning regional  power pools. National efforts to develop clean energy transition plans and  policies aligning on-grid and off-grid energy service delivery are key, but  added regional work—via regional power pools—can speed progress on  meeting the joint goals of national and regional energy sufficiency, as well as  full energy access across Africa.  • Worldwide, too little attention has been paid to ways of coordinating and  integrating off-grid, mini-grid, and large utility-scale power systems. For  African countries and individuals, the benefits of such a systems nexus can  be transformative.   Text Box 1: An electricity grid lexicon  A number of industry terms related to the technical, economic, management, and  environmental elements of the power system are defined here.  Capacity factor: the ratio of a power plant’s actual generation output over a period of  time to its potential output (also known as nameplate capacity) if the power plant were to  operate at full nameplate capacity continuously over the same period of time.  Captive generation: localized sources of power such as diesel generators set up by  individuals or small communities for personal use. It is also known as self-generation.  Contingency reserves: extra generation that is kept available in the case of generator or  transmission outage.  Curtailment: the reduction in a power plant’s scheduled output due to excess generation  and transmission congestion. Typically there is no compensation for the reduction in  output, and it may decrease the plant’s profitability.  Demand response: the shifting of loads by getting end-users to shut off appliances and  larger industrial machines at peak times and to run those machines at specific off-peak  hours instead, changing the load profile to match the generation supply.  Demand uncertainty: all power systems are planned with a degree of uncertainty of the  load, and the demand forecasts are refined closer to the day of operation, within hours  and minutes.  Dispatchable power: electricity from generators that can adjust their power output  according to grid operator requests. Dispatchable plants have the ability to dispatch their  power over time frames from minutes to one hour.  Distributed generation: small-scale energy technologies (usually modular generators)  to produce electricity close to load centers and end users  Electricity grid: an interconnected network that delivers electricity to consumers. The  power is delivered from large generators through long-distance high-voltage transmission  lines to distribution stations where the power is stepped down to lower voltages and  connected to individual customers. This design is referred to as a centralized grid.  Energy balance: the match between supply and demand that grid operators must  maintain at all times in order to avoid electricity blackouts. Achieving this balance  requires dispatchable and flexible generators and storage.  Energy efficiency: the delivery of more services for the same energy input or the  delivery of the same services for less energy input. This is a way of managing and  restraining the growth in energy consumption.  Energy storage: various technologies such as batteries, pumped hydropower, and  flywheels that can store electrical energy and smooth electricity supply to enable constant  energy balance in a grid.  Flexible generation: the ability of power plants to ramp power production up and down  13 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  quickly and efficiently to respond to changes in energy demand.  Flexible transmission: the ability of electricity networks to limit bottlenecks in power  transmission and to allow for energy balancing in a larger area by drawing on neighboring  networks.  Fossil fuels: nonrenewable sources of energy that have developed from buried organic  matter in the earth over millions of years. They include oil, natural gas, and coal.  Grid flexibility: the ability of a power system to respond to changes in demand and  supply—is a characteristic of all power systems. Flexibility is especially critical with higher  levels of grid-connected variable renewable energy (primarily, wind and solar).  Intermittent power: the variable output of renewable sources such as solar and wind,  owing to changing weather conditions. Their intermittent power supply requires storage  and/or fast-acting generators to smooth the output.  Levelized cost of electricity: the net present value of the unit cost (capital and variable)  of electricity over the lifetime of a generating asset. It is used as a proxy for the average  price that the generating asset must receive in a market to break even over its lifetime.  Load duration curve: electricity demand sorted in descending order of magnitude over a  time period.  Mini-grid/micro-grid: any grid that is not linked to the main central grid in the country in  which it is located.  Net load: the remaining electricity demand that must be supplied by the conventional  generation fleet after all of the variable renewable energy has been consumed.  Non-spinning reserves: the additional generating capacity that is not currently  connected to the system but can be brought online after a short delay using fast-start  dispatchable generators or through imports.  Operating reserves: the generating capacity available to the system operator within a  short interval of time to meet demand in case a generator goes down or there is another  disruption to the supply. It is made up of spinning and non-spinning reserves.  Ramps: a generation plant’s rate of change of dispatchable power to follow changes in  demand. A plant may ramp up to respond to rises in demand or failure of other  generators, or ramp down during low load hours.  Renewable energy: energy that is derived from natural processes and constantly  replenished. In its various forms, it derives directly or indirectly from the sun or from heat  generated deep within the earth. It includes energy generated from solar, wind, biomass,  geothermal, hydropower, and ocean resources, as well as biofuels and hydrogen derived  from renewable resources.  Renewables integration: high penetration of renewables on the grid presents  challenges because conventional grid designs are built to transmit power from large  dispatchable and controllable generators to loads. To avoid blackouts, energy generated  and consumed on the grid must be equal at every instant. Wind and solar generators are   not dispatchable and controllable as they depend on weather patterns. Therefore, a grid  with large amounts of renewables will require storage and fast-acting dispatchable  generators to maintain grid balance.  Spinning reserves: the additional generating capacity available to grid operators to meet  unforeseen changes in demand by increasing the power output of generators that are  already connected to the power system.  Turndown: the use of generators at low output levels. Dispatchable generators may be  required to turn down to low output for a period of time and must also have the ability to  increase its generation quickly again.  15 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  1. INTRODUCTION  Sub-Saharan Africa faces two major energy challenges: inadequate energy  access and climate change. It must attain 100% electricity access and develop  clean energy systems to mitigate climate change impacts. It is the most  electricity-poor region in the world: more than 600 million people lack access to  electricity, and several million people are connected to an unreliable grid that  does not meet their daily energy service needs. Most countries in this region  have average electricity access rates of about 20%, and two out of three people  lack access to modern energy services. Demand estimates that include selfgeneration,  such as diesel generators, in sub-Saharan Africa report electricity  demand to be 423 TWh in 2010 (Castellano et al., 2015). The International  Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that electricity demand in sub-Saharan Africa  grew by about 45% from 2000 to 2012 and expects the total demand for  electricity in Africa to increase at an average rate of 4% a year until 2040 (IEA,  2014). To meet this demand, the region must significantly expand its installed  generation capacity and make extensive upgrades to its power grid. With the  current pace of electrification and population growth, more than half a billion  people are expected to remain without access to electricity by 2040 (IEA, 2016)  and full electricity access in the region is only estimated to be accomplished by  2080 (Africa Progress Panel, 2015). Hence, sub-Saharan Africa is burdened with  a complex and persistent electricity gap.  The challenge of closing the electricity gap in sub-Saharan Africa while limiting  greenhouse gas emissions is the context that frames this report. The report sets  out to review the generation potential available from different energy sources and  then looks at the challenges and opportunities presented by different electricity  expansion pathways. The work includes models of the electricity systems in two  countries: Nigeria and Kenya, in which the least-cost investment pathway is  assessed under a number of different scenarios. The report focuses on  explaining the technical and institutional challenges that characterize different  energy pathways and in this respect the report is intended as a guide to  advocates and policy-makers.  This work is based on a six-month review of the literature on electricity systems  and options in sub-Saharan Africa as well as modeling efforts assessing Kenya  and Nigeria. This report (Part 1) on closing the electricity gap in sub-Saharan  Africa is intended to complement another Oxfam report exploring the particular  challenges related to promoting energy access and addressing energy poverty.  That report, referenced as Part 2, can be found where this report was  downloaded.   UNDERSTANDING SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA’S  ELECTRICITY GAP  Sub-Saharan Africa faces an electricity gap in two senses: a mismatch between  supply and demand in grid-connected regions, and a lack of access in off-grid  regions. Closing sub-Saharan Africa’s electricity gap is a multidimensional  challenge with important implications for how to frame the region’s energy  problem as a whole.  Sub-Saharan Africa has high income and wealth inequality (IEA, 2014), which  results in vast differences in consumers’ desire and willingness to pay for  electricity. The cost of electricity also varies widely within the region, with South  Africa and Zambia being among the lowest and Djibouti and Gabon being among  the highest. Even among people who are connected to the grid, there are  disparities in consumption. Despite being connected to the grid, some people  cannot afford to consume electricity and thus cannot make use of modern energy  services. They may also suffer disproportionately higher levels of service  interruption, with no ability to depend on expensive on-site diesel generators like  wealthier people in the same region.  Also, the electronic appliances the region’s consumers will purchase—many for  the first time—will be more efficient than the current stock in many wealthier  economies. Hence, the pace, level, and profile of electricity demand in the region  will evolve differently. There are technological, geographical, cultural, and social  distinctions that suggest sub-Saharan Africa should define its own target  standard of living and type of energy services to be pursued, rather than  comparing itself with wealthier countries.  In sub-Saharan Africa, the average annual electricity consumption is 488 kWh  per capita—equivalent to about 5% of U.S. per capita consumption (World Bank,  2014). This average has been pushed up by South Africa’s high electricity  access rates. When South Africa is excluded, annual electricity consumption is  only about 150 kWh per capita (World Bank, 2014). These estimates, however,  may be conservative owing to the latent demand that remains unmet as a result  of lack of grid access in rural areas, and unreliable grids and epileptic power  supply in urban grid-connected areas. The prolific use of expensive on-site diesel  generators indicates significant latent demand, but it is difficult to accurately  measure and account for these generators in the region.  17 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  Figure 1: Rates of access to electricity and total populations without  access to electricity  Source: IEA, 2014.  Sub-Saharan Africa has a unique opportunity to expand its generation capacity  without exacerbating climate change owing to its abundant renewable resources.  At the November 2016 United Nations Climate Change Conference in Morocco,  47 members of the Climate Vulnerable Forum (many of which are in sub-  Saharan Africa) pledged to strive to achieve 100% domestic renewable energy  production as rapidly as possible (Climate Vulnerable Forum, 2016). Renewable  energy is key to solving both the region’s energy access and climate change  challenges. The limiting factor in the region’s electricity development is effective  technical, financing, and policy mechanisms to enable the region to develop  these resources. Its lack of grid infrastructure can be transformed into a  leadership opportunity to develop better-designed and more efficient power  systems without being hindered by legacy carbon-intensive assets. Governments  and private sector stakeholders have made concerted efforts to promote the use  of micro-grids and other distributed energy resources to reach unelectrified  regions, and these efforts have inadvertently resulted in the juxtaposition of  centralized and distributed technologies as opposing efforts. The two should be   regarded, however, as complementary. When centralized and distributed grids  are built with the intent to integrate and connect them in the future, they can have  strategic synergies. Effective frameworks must be put in place to facilitate this.  Finally, utility and tariff structures can be reformed to reflect fair and stable rates  that ensure reliable delivery to end-users.  The region will face significant economic, environmental, political, and  operational challenges and trade-offs on the way to achieving these goals. To  understand the scale of these challenges, we designed an open-access power  system model to analyze optimal pathways for expanding supply capacity in two  case study countries: Kenya and Nigeria. This analysis compares the average  costs of various expansion scenarios for achieving reliable and affordable power  by 2035 and explores the roles of renewables in the electricity mix under various  demand growth, and policy conditions.  DEFINING ENERGY ACCESS  One of the challenges in addressing the electricity gap in sub-Saharan Africa is  that grid connection rates there do not present a holistic picture of actual access  to modern energy services. It is common for countries to have a high rate of grid  connection combined with a low quality of electricity supply (see Nigeria in Figure  12).  Energy access is intertwined with complex socioeconomic factors that cannot be  measured using a binary “connected/not connected” approach. Measuring who  has access to energy, particularly electricity, requires a holistic understanding of  the quality of access and how it affects socioeconomic development. It calls for  answering questions such as, Is there a connection to the central grid? How  affordable are the grid connection and its electricity supply? How reliable and  predictable is the electricity supply? How safe is the electricity supply? In  response to this complexity, the World Bank proposed a multi-tier framework for  defining and measuring access to energy (Bhatia & Angelou, 2015), based on  several principles:  1. Energy access should be measured by usability, reliability, and affordability  defined from the user’s perspective.  2. Energy access involves a spectrum of service levels experienced by  households and individuals.  3. Energy access can be achieved through a variety of technologies, so its  measure should be technology-neutral.  19 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  Figure 2: The multi-tier energy access framework  Source: Bhatia & Angelou, 2015.   2. RESOURCE POTENTIAL IN  SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA  Sub-Saharan Africa has abundant renewable and fossil energy resources that  have yet to be developed to meet its electricity demand. Its technical generation  capacity potential is estimated to be 11,000 gigawatts (GW), largely from  renewables (Figure 3).  POTENTIAL RENEWABLE AND FOSSIL  RESOURCES  All of the countries across the region have high solar potential, totaling about  10,000 GW, and the technical potential for solar photovoltaic alone has been  estimated at 6,500 terrawatt hours (TWh) a year (Cartwright, 2015). Most of its  coastal countries have high wind potential, totaling about 109 GW. The East  Africa Rift Valley offers an estimated 15 GW of geothermal capacity, mainly in  Ethiopia and Kenya. Because the region is home to the Congo and the Nile  Rivers, among the world’s longest rivers, it also has some of the greatest  hydropower resources in the world. Its exploitable hydropower is estimated at  about 350 GW, located mainly in Angola, Cameroon, the Democratic Republic of  Congo (DRC), Ethiopia, and Gabon. Its fossil energy resources include recent oil  and gas discoveries, and it has about 400 GW of natural gas potential. Coal  resources are estimated at 300 GW, mainly in Botswana, Mozambique, and  South Africa (Castellano et al., 2015). Notably, however, some low-access  countries like Angola and Nigeria have a well-developed petroleum production  infrastructure that has not translated into a reliable electricity supply (Figure 1).  21 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  Figure 3: Abundant renewable energy potential in Sub-Saharan Africa  Source: Cartwright, 2015.  Figure 4 shows the spatial distribution of solar irradiation in Africa, highlighting  high-potential areas of concentrated solar power and photovoltaic development.  Figure 4: Solar irradiation across Africa  Source: GeoSUN Africa, 2011.   Figure 5 shows that the largest electricity generation potential exists in Central  and Southern Africa, comprising mostly hydropower, coal, and natural gas.  Geothermal potential exists mainly in Eastern Africa, in Ethiopia, Kenya, and  Tanzania. This concentration of resources in different zones highlights the  importance of regional cooperation, especially because some of the regions with  the greatest regional generation potential do not have the highest demand  (Castellano et al., 2015).  Figure 5: Electricity generation potential (GW) by technology  Source: (Castellano et al., 2015).  RENEWABLE ENERGY ZONES  Successfully exploiting sub-Saharan Africa’s renewable energy resources will  demand whole-systems thinking. Although the region has abundant wind and  solar resources, high-quality resources are unevenly distributed geographically,  so promoting the supply of clean, low-cost wind and solar energy to all countries  will require effective regional collaboration and grid interconnection (Wu et al.,  2016). Differences in the operational characteristics of various generation  technologies can be complementary, thereby reducing the need for one-for-one  backup generation and storage for renewables. For example, increased wind and  solar capacity in countries like South Africa and Tanzania can be used along with  existing hydropower generation in countries such as DRC, Ethiopia, Malawi,  Mozambique, Uganda, and Zambia to provide balancing services to regional  grids. At the same time, solar and wind generation may reduce the risk of inter-annual  and climate-driven variation in hydropower availability. Many of the high-potential  renewable zones are close to existing transmission infrastructure and  23 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  major load centers, thus requiring lower transmission upgrade and extension  costs (Figures 6 and 7). These synergies can be exploited. Dual land-use  strategies, such as the combination of agricultural land and wind development,  will prevent potential conflicts that come with land access. Wind and solar  generation sites can be co-located in order to reduce costs, maximize  transmission efficiencies, and minimize ecological impacts (Wu et al., 2016).  Figure 6: Distance of high–wind energy zones to nearest transmission (A),  substation (B), and load center (C) in Eastern and Southern Africa  Source: Wu et al., 2015.   Figure 7: Distance of high–solar energy zones to nearest transmission (A),  substation (B), and load center (C) in Eastern and Southern Africa  Source: Wu et al., 2015.  25 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  3. ELECTRICITY DEMAND IN  SUB-SAHARAN AFRICA  Data on demand for electricity in sub-Saharan Africa are often unreliable or  unavailable, but the data that are available show that demand growing quickly  and a large portion remains latent due to low access levels in the region.  DEMAND ESTIMATES AND PROJECTIONS  The International Energy Agency (IEA) estimates that electricity demand in the  region grew by about 35% from 2000 to 2012 to reach 352 TWh. Currently,  average per capita electricity consumption in sub-Saharan Africa is 488 kWh a  year, the lowest rate of any major world region. By comparison, in North Africa,  where the electricity access rate is over 90%, electricity demand increased by  more than 80% from 2000 to 2012 reaching 1,500 kWh per capita. The greatest  demand in sub-Saharan Africa is in Nigeria and South Africa, which together  account for about 40% of total demand (IEA, 2014).  The IEA forecasts that total demand for electricity in Africa will increase at an  average rate of 4% a year through 2040 to reach 1,570 TWh, including captive  power estimates (Figure 8). McKinsey’s power sector report on sub-Saharan  Africa estimates electricity demand at 423 TWh in 2010 and also projects an  annual growth rate of about 4% through 2040 (Castellano et al., 2015).  Discrepancies in estimates of historical electricity demand, particularly owing to  unreliable data on captive power and self-generation, add to the uncertainty of  demand projections, which are so important in deciding the future design of the  region’s power system. This is why the open source modeling tool in section 8  has been designed to estimate power system capacity expansion pathways  despite poor data availability and access.   Figure 8: Expected growth in electricity demand in sub-Saharan Africa  Source: Castellano et al., 2015.  FUTURE DEMAND PROFILES  As African countries develop, their electricity demand profiles will change.  Current demand profiles show that in most of Africa, demand for electricity peaks  in the evening. The shape of this demand profile—particularly the size of peak  demand relative to average demand—is important for capacity planning. If peak  demand is much greater than average demand, more generation capacity will  have to be installed, even if that capacity is used for only a few hours a day when  peak demand occurs. The need for “peaker plants” greatly impacts the  economics of the grid.  Not only the size but also the timing of peak demand is important because of the  hourly availability of variable renewable resources. Peak demand in Kenya, for  example, and other counties in sub-Saharan Africa occurs in the evening (Figure  9). Solar power is not available in the evenings, so solar installed capacity will not  contribute to the peak capacity required to meet demand. Solar, therefore, may  be less favorable than other resources that can be available during all hours of  the day. This is why storage technologies play a major role in deploying  renewable energy. Batteries can, for example, store solar energy during peak  production times in the afternoon and discharge it in the evening during peak  demand hours.    As the manufacturing and service sectors develop in the region and the shape of  the demand profile evolves, peak demand hours may shift to earlier in the day,  during peak solar production. Such a shift would greatly improve the grid value of  solar energy and make it more optimal in system planning.  The U.S. state of California has a power system that integrates large amounts of  non-dispatchable energy; its experience thus suggests some of the challenges  sub-Saharan Africa may face in integrating solar PV and wind. The duck chart  shown in Figure 10 shows the net load of the California electricity grid over a  day. Each line represents the net load, equal to the normal load minus wind and  PV generation. The “belly” of the duck curve represents the period of lowest net  load: the afternoon, when PV generation is at a maximum. The belly of the curve  grows as PV installations are projected to increase between 2012 and 2020. As  the sun sets in the evening and solar generation falls, the net load increases.  This results in steep ramps in output from other dispatchable generators, usually  thermal plants.  The duck chart shows how solar PV could potentially generate more electricity  than the grid can consume. During overgeneration conditions, the supply of  power exceeds demand and requires flexibility, such as demand response, grid  storage, or, ultimately, a reduction in output from conventional generation plants.  When conventional generation cannot be backed down any further to  accommodate the oversupply of variable generation, it leads to curtailment.  Curtailment occurs when a system operator decreases the electricity output from  a wind or PV plant below what it would normally produce. For wind generators,  this is performed by changing the blade angle. For solar plants, generation is  curtailed by either reducing output from its inverter or disconnecting the plant   altogether. Curtailment raises several challenges. It requires a system operator  to have physical control of the generator, which is typically the case for large  renewable power plants but not for smaller systems, particularly distributed or  rooftop systems. Curtailment also reduces the economic and environmental  benefits of solar and wind plants because each unit of curtailed energy  represents a unit of energy unsold and a unit of fossil fuel generation not  displaced. As the amount of curtailment increases, the overall benefits of  additional solar may drop to the point where additional installations are not worth  the cost (Denholm et al., 2015). This is why grid flexibility is critical to sub-  Saharan Africa’s transition to a low-carbon grid.  Figure 10: Changes in the net load on the California grid at high rates of  renewable penetration  Source: Denholm et al., 2015.  29 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  4. ELECTRICITY GENERATION  Sub-Saharan Africa’s power grid has an installed generation capacity of about 90  GW—about 0.1 kW per capita, in stark contrast with wealthier economies that  have installed capacities ranging from 1 to 3 kW per capita (IEA, 2014). Half of  the region’s capacity is located in South Africa, and 13 GW are located in Nigeria  (Figure 11). Only about 6 GW (or 40%) is operational owing to poor maintenance  and fuel shortages in Nigeria. The installed capacity for many sub-Saharan  African countries is less than 1 GW (IEA, 2014). Excluding South Africa, the  entire installed generation capacity of sub-Saharan Africa is only 28 GW,  equivalent to that of Argentina (Castellano et al., 2015).  Figure 11: Installed grid-based capacity (GW) in sub-Saharan Africa, 2000  and 2012  Source: IEA, 2014.  The region’s dearth of generation capacity is partly due to its low level of  investment in power systems, which currently accounts for about 0.5% of its  gross domestic product (GDP) (Africa Progress Panel, 2015). According to a  recent report, sub-Saharan Africa has the potential to install about 1 terawatt  (TW) of generation capacity from a range of different technology options,  excluding solar (Castellano et al., 2015). About 20% of the region’s current  generation is from hydropower and more than 70% is from fossil fuels  (Cartwright, 2015). This dependence on fossil fuels is at odds with resource  potential estimates that show the abundance of renewable resources in the  region.   The installed utility-scale generation capacity and mix of each region is as  follows:  • Southern Africa has more installed grid generation capacity than the rest of  sub-Saharan Africa. Of Southern Africa’s total 58 GW, 80% is in South Africa  alone. The rest of Southern Africa has only 12 GW, mostly hydropower with  some coal, oil, and gas. South Africa gets 85% of its generation capacity from  coal and the rest from oil distillate (6%), hydropower (5%), and nuclear (4%).  It is the only African country with nuclear power plants (with a capacity of  about 2 GW). In 2012, the average cost of grid generation across Southern  Africa was about $55 per MWh, owing to the high use of low-cost coal and  hydropower (IEA, 2014).  • West Africa’s grid generation capacity is estimated at about 20 GW. Of this  capacity, more than 50% is gas generation (mostly in Nigeria), about 30% is  oil distillate, and about 20% is hydropower. Some countries, like Benin,  Burkina Faso, and Niger, import most of their electricity. In 2012, the average  cost of generation was about $140 per MWh, owing to dependence on gas  and oil generation (IEA, 2014).  • East Africa has grid generation capacity of about 8 GW, of which 50%  comes from hydropower, 45% from oil distillate, and the rest from geothermal  and gas. About 250 MW of geothermal resources lie mainly in Kenya. In  2012, the average cost of generation was $110 per MWh, despite the  region’s inexpensive hydropower generation, owing to the high use of  expensive oil generation plants (IEA, 2014).  • Central Africa has the lowest grid generation capacity in sub-Saharan Africa,  at 4 GW, composed mainly of 65% hydropower, 15% gas, and 20% oil  distillate. In 2012, the average cost of generation was around $95 per MWh,  owing to the low cost of hydropower (IEA, 2014).  INDEPENDENT POWER PRODUCERS  Electric utilities in sub-Saharan Africa are typically vertically integrated—that is,  they control all levels of the supply chain: generation, transmission, and  distribution. Because of the poor performance of the power sector in the region,  however, many countries have attempted to unbundle their electricity utilities to  allow participation by independent power producers (IPPs). IPPs are entities,  usually private, that generate and sell electricity to utilities and end users. Ghana,  Nigeria, and Uganda have had some success in this area. Nonetheless, as of  2014, 21 countries in the region still had state-owned and vertically integrated  utilities with no private sector participation, precluding IPPs. Some countries  remained vertically integrated but still introduced IPPs.  31 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  Currently 18 sub-Saharan countries have IPPs, with a cumulative capacity of 6.8  GW. These IPPs range in size from a few megawatts to 600 MW. The  overwhelming majority of IPP capacity (82%) is thermal; 18% is fueled by  renewables. The presence of IPPs can help reduce the perception of risk in  investing in power systems in the region and encourage private investment. To  succeed, IPPs require favorable local investment climates, clear policy and  regulatory frameworks, local availability of cost-competitive fuels, and effective  planning, procurement, and contracting practices (Eberhard et al., 2016).  SELF-GENERATION  Installed capacity estimates in the region are appallingly low compared with the  resource potential, and the situation is even worse than those estimates indicate.  Installed capacity and grid presence does not guarantee that people have access  to electricity. In Nigeria, for example, abundant fossil energy potential and the  development of petroleum-producing infrastructure have not increased reliable  connection to the electric grid (Figure 12).  Sub-Saharan Africa’s inability to provide reliable electricity has led to the prolific  growth of inefficient and expensive on-site self-generation by industrial,  commercial, and even residential consumers, reaching up 10% of the region’s  generation capacity. This has increased the cost and risk of doing business in  sub-Saharan Africa. Lack of reliable electricity has resulted in economic losses of  about 2% of the region’s GDP and about 5% of annual sales of its firms  (Castellano et al., 2015). In Nigeria, 85% of firms use a back-up generator  (Cartwright, 2015). These back-up generators are expensive, costing about  300% more than electricity from the grid (Foster & Steinbuks, 2009). This prolific  use shows the region’s appetite for electricity and willingness to pay for it.  Text Box 2: The dangers of onsite generators  On-site generators are usually noisy, pollute the living and working environments of  communities, and pose significant risks of fire and respiratory illnesses. Energy poverty,  both for primary uses such as cooking and for electricity, creates significant health  threats. About 600,000 premature deaths in Africa can be attributed to household air  pollution from the burning of solid fuels for cooking, while household diesel generators  increase the risk of carbon monoxide poisoning and fires.  CURRENT CHALLENGES  The electricity sector in the region presents a unique set of challenges. While  sub-Saharan Africa contributes the least of any global region to greenhouse gas  emissions, it is most vulnerable to climate change impacts such as droughts and  reduced agricultural yields (Kang et al., 2009). Erratic rainfall patterns and  prolonged droughts can reduce hydroelectric output and force extended outages  (Foster & Steinbuks, 2009). The following challenges are priority targets for  reform in sub-Saharan Africa’s electricity sector, with the aim of reaching  affordable energy access and sustainability goals across the region.  • Lack of system capacity. The region’s persistent electricity scarcity has  crippled economic growth and prevented it from attaining several of its health  and education development goals (IEA, 2014). Causes of this scarcity include  lack of generation capacity for grid-connected regions, absence of proper grid  infrastructure to deliver generated power, poor maintenance of generation  33 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  plants, regulatory challenges that prevent a steady flow of revenue to  maintain and invest in new generation capacity, and the dispersal of  population in remote areas. This lack of systematic planning for the power  sector has resulted in a system with high transmission and distribution losses  (averaging 18% across the region when South Africa is excluded) (IEA,  2014), and created a high dependence on large dams and expensive diesel  plants.  • Poor sector management. Reforming the energy utilities and their regulation  to improve their operational efficiency and promote regional cooperation is  key to closing the electricity gap. The region spends billions of dollars on  utility losses and petroleum subsidies, which do not benefit power sector  development (Africa Progress Panel, 2015). Since most utilities cannot  recover their costs without these subsidies, power systems development is  perceived as high risk and is thus unattractive to private investors. Therefore,  most energy investments are limited to energy commodities produced for  export, for which prices can be better guaranteed.  • High system losses. System losses in sub-Saharan Africa are double the  world average. They include technical losses from poorly maintained  transmission and distribution networks, and commercial losses from low  revenue collection. Transmission and distribution losses are estimated at  18% across the region, when South Africa is excluded (IEA, 2014). These  losses increase the generation capacity that is required to meet load, making  centralized generation uneconomical, exposing power companies to large  financial risks, and increasing end-user tariffs (Castellano et al., 2015).  • Dependence on large dams. Because of the seasonal variability of  hydropower output and the impact of prolonged droughts in the region,  reliance on large dams creates fragile power systems and increases the  financial and climate risks in the region (Kammen et al., 2015). Until now, the  environmental and financial risks of large dams have largely been evaluated  while the dams are in operation, but a recent Oxford study shows that in most  cases, even without accounting for negative externalities on the environment,  the construction costs of large dams are too high to yield positive returns on  investment. This is mostly due to cost overruns and implementation delays  (Ansar et al., 2014). The study has shed new light on long-term energy  strategies and debunked the notion that dams produce cheap power. For  example, Kariba Dam, which holds the world’s largest reservoir and accounts  for 40% of Southern Africa’s generation capacity, has been incapacitated by  ongoing droughts exacerbated by climate change. The dam, which sits on the  Zambezi River Basin, is at high risk from weather extremes, both floods and  droughts. Given that the dam supplies half of Zambia’s electricity, this  vulnerability threatens the country’s economic activities (Leslie, 2016).   • Dependence on fossil fuels. Fossil fuels pose a range of challenges. The  region has abundant natural gas reserves that are threatened by  mismanagement and systemic venting and flaring. Expanding gas  infrastructure to provide electricity will require careful management to prevent  methane leaks—this will be one of the biggest challenges of mitigating  climate change while providing electricity. The prolific use of coal in Southern  Africa has electrified the region but burdened it with significant air pollution  and public health challenges. Countries that depend heavily on the oil  industry, such as Nigeria, are affected by price changes in the international  market. The sharp fall in oil prices between July 2014 and January 2015  resulted in a 28% drop in Nigeria’s revenue (IRENA, 2015).  One way of overcoming the sector’s challenges is through regional power pools  that allow countries to aggregate resources and extend grids across national  borders to capitalize on regional diversity in resources and demand. Four  regional power pools already exist, but only about 7% of electricity is traded  across international borders, mostly through the South African Power Pool.  Facilitating increased use of the region’s four power pools could save over $50  billion in capital investments in the power sector (Castellano et al., 2015). Other  strategies to incorporate large amount of variable renewable generation include  using existing reservoir hydropower to provide storage, deploying novel chemical  and mechanical storage technologies, and adopting widespread demand  response programs.  35 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  5. SOLUTIONS TO THE  ELECTRICITY GAP  Closing sub-Saharan Africa’s electricity gap has two main components. One  component involves increasing the region’s electricity supply and determining  whether new generation capacity will come from fossil or renewable sources. The  second component involves meeting electricity demand and determining the role  of centralized and decentralized grids in increasing people’s access. These two  components are intertwined and can be made complementary using strategic  frameworks and policies.  THE FOSSIL FUEL PATH TO INCREASING SUPPLY  The main challenges of using fossil fuels to increase the supply of electricity are  price volatility and variability, local pollution, and climate change.  First, the volatility and variability of fossil fuel prices create a multifaceted  problem: importing countries face an insecure fuel supply, while price variability  causes oil and gas producers to curtail supply under low oil and gas prices and  generators to suffer high economic losses under high oil and gas prices. The  uncertainty affects the economics of energy systems, and with most countries  locked into their fuel choices for decades, it increases the risk of stranded assets  whose operating costs are no longer affordable (African Development Bank,  2013).  Text Box 3: Unstable supply in Nigeria  70% of Nigeria’s fleet of power plants rely on natural gas. Insecure and unreliable natural  gas supply incapacitates Nigeria’s generation fleet, increasing the use of private diesel  generators as backup. In 2012, more than 10 TWh of Nigeria’s electricity demand was  met by backup generators (IEA, 2014).  Second, the prevalence of subsidies in sub-Saharan Africa creates a significant  barrier to moving away from fossil fuels. Governments spend about US$21 billion  a year on fuel subsidies, including subsidies covering utility losses (Africa  Progress Panel, 2015). The vast majority of these subsidies are spent in North  Africa, as well as in Angola and Nigeria. By straining national budgets and  discouraging investment in renewable resources, the subsidies inhibit  sustainable energy development. They will eventually trap the region’s energy   investments in carbon-intensive technologies that could become stranded assets  in the event of future climate and emissions regulations. Several sub-Saharan  countries such as Angola, Ghana, Kenya, Nigeria, and Uganda have tried to  reform their policies in recent years. In particular, Kenya successfully reformed its  electricity fuel cost subsidy by allowing an automatic pass-through of changes in  fuel cost to aid the development of domestic renewable energy (Whitley and van  der Burg, 2015). To close the electricity gap sustainably and cleanly, some of  these investments in fossil fuel subsidies may have to be channeled to  renewable energy systems.  A study of cost-optimal rural electrification options in Africa demonstrates the  impact of subsidies on electricity access. The study compared diesel generators,  solar PV, and grid extension options for off-grid areas and found that the  presence of subsidies was crucial in determining if solar PV was cost-optimal  compared with diesel. Neighboring countries (with similar geographical factors)  had different optimal choices (Figure 13), revealing how sensitive rural  electrification costs are to fuel prices. The subsidies that exist for diesel, as  shown in Figure 14, could also be directed toward supporting PV to avoid  distorting the emerging rural electrification market (Szabo et al., 2011).  Figure 13: Optimal option for off-grid electrification in Africa, comparing  diesel with solar PV  Source: Szabo et al., 2011.  37 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  Figure 14: Retail fuel prices in Africa in 2008, illustrating regions with high  fuel subsides and taxes  Source: Szabo et al., 2011.  Finally, pollution from coal-fired plants will have significant impacts on local public  health and climate change. Urban areas in sub-Saharan Africa already suffer  from high levels of air pollution owing to the prolific use of diesel generators in  residential and commercial buildings. South Africa’s Mpumalanga province,  which is home to 12 coal-fired power plants, has among the world’s highest  levels of air pollution, particularly nitrogen dioxide, particulate matter, and sulfur  dioxide. Emissions there exceed the maximum level recommended by the World  Health Organization (Siegfried, 2014).   The role of carbon capture and storage  Some of the environmental challenges associated with a fossil fuel path could be  alleviated by carbon capture and storage (CCS) technologies, which prevent  large amounts of CO2 from being released into the atmosphere. These  technologies capture CO2 produced by large industrial power plants, compress it  for transportation, and then inject it deep into a rock formation at a carefully  selected safe site, where it is permanently stored (Global CCS Institute, n.d.).  Ten countries, including Canada, China, Malawi, and Saudi Arabia, made CCS  part of their climate commitments at the Paris climate conference. CCS is viewed  as a bridge technology that would buy time to make the transition to a  sustainable economy based on energy conservation and renewable energy  sources (Vergragt et al., 2011). It will require significant investment in new  infrastructure such as pipelines and long-term monitoring.  Using CCS as a bridge technology to transition to low-carbon systems could,  however, lock in fossil fuel use, particularly in sub-Saharan Africa, where much of  the needed generation capacity has yet to be developed. Combining CCS with  bioenergy production, in an approach known as BECCS, could alleviate this risk.  BECCS involves sustainably producing biomass, using it to generate electricity,  and sequestering its emissions—the result is an effective carbon sink.  There are several barriers to deploying CCS in sub-Saharan Africa, including the  high capital cost, the risk of carbon leakage, and the region’s limited geologically  feasible sites and lack of regulatory frameworks. CCS could also threaten food  security in countries where the geologic potential for carbon storage is found on  fertile agricultural land (Román, 2011).  THE RENEWABLE PATH TO INCREASING SUPPLY  The main challenges of using renewables to expand the supply of electricity are  the risk that climate change will hamper hydropower, the intermittency and  variability of solar and wind, and the risk of overgeneration and curtailment.  First, while sub-Saharan Africa has the potential to generate abundant clean,  renewable, and affordable electricity through hydropower, a number of studies  (such as Kammen et al., 2015) reveal a high risk that climate change will reduce  the performance of hydropower dams, as seen recently in the Kariba Dam.  Droughts and unprecedented variability in rainfall will constrain the technical  performance of large hydropower reservoirs, with long-term impacts on  agriculture and electricity production (Kang et al., 2009). Large dams pose social  and ecological risks as well. They can threaten livelihoods by causing the loss of  agricultural land and requiring community resettlement. Dammed reservoirs can  result in stagnant reservoir water, high sedimentation, and algae growth that  39 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  impact wildlife (Union of Concerned Scientists, 2016). For example, the  development of the Akosombo Dam on the Volta River in Ghana led to the  resettlement of about 80,000 people from 740 villages. It also resulted in  biodiversity loss and floods that increased the risk of water-borne diseases  (Kalitsi, 2003). There are measures that can alleviate the detrimental impacts of  large dams, and implementing them requires effective policies and management.  Second, renewable sources of generation, such as wind and solar are variable  and intermittent—that is, they are available only when the wind is blowing and  the sun is shining. Still, they can be forecast to some level of certainty. The real  challenge is that grid systems are conventionally designed to rely on controllable  generators rather than intermittent sources. Many countries in sub-Saharan  Africa may be able to leapfrog this challenge with intentional design.  Finally, electricity consumption in most countries in sub-Saharan Africa peaks in  the evening, whereas solar generation typically peaks in the early to midafternoon.  This mismatch raises a risk of producing more electricity than can be  consumed (overgeneration) at certain times, when electricity generation would  consequently be cut off and not paid for (curtailment).  Cost of renewables  The declining cost of renewables means that high economic cost is no longer the  primary constraint to deploying renewables. The challenge is achieving effective  grid operations. Globally, the weighted average cost of utility-scale installed solar  PV dropped from about $5 per watt in 2009 to about $2 per watt in 2015. Costs in  Africa have been comparable (Figure 15). Prices of solar PV modules have also  dropped significantly since 2009, to about $0.52 to $0.72 per watt in 2015. In  response to this cost reduction, Africa added about 800 MW of solar PV in 2014  and 750 MW in 2015, doubling its cumulative capacity (IRENA, 2016). Despite  sub-Saharan Africa’s high potential for solar generation, most of the continent’s  rapid solar capacity growth has been in North Africa. Recently, a proposed 800  MW solar plant in the United Arab Emirates reported an average cost of $0.03  per kWh (Clifford, 2016), compared with typical per kWh costs of $0.08 for largescale  hydropower, $0.10 for geothermal, and $0.07 to $0.14 for natural gas (IEA,  2014).   Figure 15: Installed cost of existing and proposed utility-scale solar PV in  Africa, 2011–2018  Source: IRENA, 2016.Note: Each circle represents an individual power project.  Overall, attaining a 100% renewable vision in sub-Saharan Africa will require the  following:  1. policies that incentivize renewable energy deployment and discourage  new fossil fuel development,  2. innovative financing mechanisms that allow decentralized solutions to  thrive and be integrated into future grid expansion,  3. an enabling framework that attracts private investors to the energy sector  and builds human capacity by empowering local entrepreneurs,  4. improved organizational procedures and sector management that support  operational power pools powered by international and interregional  transmission lines, allowing power sharing and reduced costs,  5. policies that incentivize and support decentralized renewable energy  systems that enable 100% access to affordable and reliable electricity,  and  6. electricity supply strategies that prioritize diversity of resources such as  dispatchable renewables and storage, negate the need for fossil fuels,  and ensure supply security.  41 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  6. LOW-CARBON GRID  OPERATIONS  The main challenge of a renewable-dominated capacity expansion pathway is  not economic cost—it is the system flexibility required to cope with the  intermittency and variability of solar and wind. High penetration of renewables  requires a power system enabled with ICTs and other smart grid technologies  that allow real-time system monitoring and remote control of voltage and power  flow conditions, which are critical to the rapid response needed for the variability  of wind and solar. It also requires effective grid management that uses power  pools to enable long-reach regional cooperation and power sharing.  SYSTEM FLEXIBILITY  Power system infrastructure and managers must be able to adapt and respond to  changing conditions in various time frames. Short-term grid flexibility involves  balancing demand and supply over minutes and hours of a day, and long-term  grid flexibility involves changing generation and transmission capacity over years  of investment. Increasing the electric power system’s flexibility is critical to  reliable operation under high penetration levels of variable renewable resources.  Sources of flexibility include dispatchable generators, increased transmission  capacity and access, large balancing areas and regional cooperation, demandside  management, and storage.  Every power system possesses an inherent level of flexibility. Electricity cannot  be “paused” as it flows on the wires in the grid, traveling from the generation  source to various end-uses: it is impossible to temporarily store excess electricity  on the wires of the grid in anticipation of a consumer’s decision to flip a light  switch. Instead, the amount of electricity being generated at any time needs to  match the amount of electricity being consumed. Because demand can change  rapidly (e.g., when people turn their lights on after dark), power systems are  designed to be flexible in order to respond to such rapid changes—both  predictable and unpredictable—in demand. Also, robust power systems should  have enough extra generation capacity (also known as “operating” and “spinning”  reserves1) to make up for unexpected generation failure (for example, when a  power plant goes offline).  1  See the lexicon in Text Box 1.   In general, power systems that rely heavily on natural gas and hydropower are  more flexible than systems with large amounts of coal and nuclear. Coal and  nuclear plants take longer to reach their full generation capacity (also known as  their ramping time) than gas plants, and reservoir dams have storage  capabilities. Conventionally, grid operators receive demand forecasts one day  ahead that are updated in the hour ahead and finally in the minutes ahead of  service. It is difficult to plan supply to match demand forecasts using solar and  wind as they vary their output significantly over short time scales, such as hours  (the wind can suddenly stop blowing over a large area, or the sun can go behind  the clouds), and they are not dispatchable. Therefore transitioning to high  penetration levels of variable renewable generation will require more flexibility.  Backup generators can improve flexibility, and this backup capacity need not be  at a one-to-one ratio; because the grid can act as a holistic system, each  installation of renewable generation does not require an equal backup of  dispatchable generation (Cochran et al., 2014). For example, an interconnected  network of grids can supply electricity to cloudy areas drawing on solar  generation in areas where the sun is still shining and using other dispatchable  generation.  This potential of a holistic system argues for building effectively integrated power  pools to link generation capacity over large geographical distances and smooth  out the variable output of solar and wind. Because it takes several years to invest  in and build new generators and transmission lines, planning for system flexibility  is critical to ensure the growth of variable renewable generation. A highly flexible  system ensures that renewables generators will not be curtailed (shut off)  frequently, hence improving the capacity factor of renewable power stations and  increasing the plant’s electricity sales. These features improve the revenue  streams and payback timelines, making renewable generators more attractive to  investors and government stakeholders.  Figuring out how much flexibility is needed in sub-Saharan Africa is critical to  informing policy-makers’ investment decisions, particularly on fuel choices, in the  upcoming years. This calculation requires in-depth power system modeling of  each country’s grid and the power pools (as task that is impossible for some  countries with limited data access). Power system studies will dispel incorrect  notions about the difficulty of operating power systems with high levels of  variable renewable resources and make clear what the actual operating costs of  renewable generation capacity will be. Some countries in the region have  improved access to power system data, and in-depth studies have been carried  out in Kenya and South Africa. High-resolution power system studies in Kenya  have shown that the ratio of storage to wind capacity is about 1:10 for 30%  penetration (Carvallo et al., forthcoming). This ratio is a proxy measure for how  flexible the Kenya grid is to integrating renewables without storage. It also shows  that variable generation like wind does not require one-to-one backup capacity to  ensure a reliable supply (Carvallo et al., forthcoming). Besides adjusting supply  43 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  side resources, power systems can improve flexibility by enabling demand  response and using distributed storage.  In the transition to high renewable power systems, regulators and system  operators can draw from a suite of options (Figure 16). The options include  physical strategies such as battery storage, operational strategies such as  ramping thermal fleets and improved forecasting, and institutional strategies such  as new market designs and integration of demand response. Some sources of  flexibility, such as pumped hydropower storage, are cheaper than adding grid  batteries. Although options and associated costs to increase flexibility are  system-specific, generally tools that help exploit existing flexibility through  changes to system operations and market designs are cheaper than those that  require investments in new sources of flexibility. Although changes to system  operation and market design require less capital investment, they do have  implementation costs and may entail changes to institutional relationships  (Cochran et al., 2014).  Figure 16: Relative costs of strategies for increasing power system  flexibility  Source: Cochran et al., 2014.  The first two columns of Figure 16—system operation and markets—represent  low-cost options but require operational and organizational changes. The load  column represents demand-side changes—particularly demand response. The   remaining columns represent changes to the physical grid (generation plants and  transmission networks).  High system flexibility will prevent the following operational challenges:  • Electricity price volatility. When generators are inflexible and cannot  reduce their output during low load periods, excess energy on the system can  cause prices to drop significantly, exposing plants to high financial risk. Also,  when generators cannot increase their output during high demand periods,  prices skyrocket, to the detriment of distribution companies and end users.  • Energy curtailment. Non-dispatchable or inflexible systems must be  curtailed (shut off) during periods of high generation and low demand on the  system.  • Load shedding/brownouts. Quality of power to end-users depends on the  power system frequency, which is kept at an optimal level by balancing  supply and demand. Inflexible power systems necessitate brownouts and  eventual load shedding in order to return balance to the system during  periods of low generation and high demand.  Matching supply and demand across different load hours and regions (that is,  across time and physical space) is critical to achieving system flexibility, which is  why successful implementation of power pools in sub-Saharan Africa will  facilitate high renewable energy deployment over the coming decades. Power  pools aggregate loads and generators through transmission networks allowing  for greater flexibility in supply and demand.  RENEWABLES AS BASELOAD CAPACITY  Electricity load is typically categorized as baseload, intermediate load, and peak  load (Figure 17). Efforts to achieve high rates of renewable energy penetration  face a challenge in reliably meeting baseload demand. Baseload demand refers  to minimum or predictable demand in a power system that is not highly variable.  Conventionally, baseload demand is met by nuclear and coal because these  plants run at relatively constant output, have slow response times, and have high  investment costs that need to be recovered quickly. Power systems with high  penetrations of renewable energy require generation mixes with high flexibility,  which in turn reduces the need for plants like nuclear, which have low flexibility.  Non-dispatchable renewable generators such solar PV and wind cannot meet  baseload at all times owing to their variability. However, dispatchable renewable  generators such as large hydropower, biogas, and geothermal can supply  flexibility to the power system and meet baseload demand. Therefore, the  capacity of renewables to meet baseload demand will depend on the generation  45 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  mix (of dispatchable and variable energy sources) and demand profile of the  power system.  Figure 17: Load duration curve  Source: Ueckerdt and Kempener, 2015.  Renewable integration will increase as future power systems are enhanced with  smart grid and information and communication technologies (ICTs) that allow  greater remote control of centralized and distributed generation instead of  requiring the system operator to have physical control of the generator. High  system flexibility also helps manage high variability in generation—for example  cloudiness over solar panels—that causes rapid changes in the net load (Figure  18). Rapid changes require fast-ramp plants that can respond quickly by  increasing or decreasing generation in the form of peaker plants and spinning  reserves. The amount of fast-ramp capacity required is dependent, then, on the  power system’s overall generation mix, the hourly load shape, the penetration of  variable renewables, and the accuracy of demand forecasting. Since many parts  of sub-Saharan Africa are not yet grid-connected, building a low-carbon grid with  ICTs and storage technologies would not require large changes to existing  infrastructure. Therefore, the region can develop intentionally by choosing  strategic electricity supply mixes that enable high penetration of renewables. If  the region chooses its future electricity supply mix with flexibility as a priority, it  may reduce the need for centralized energy storage to manage high penetrations  of renewables.   Figure 18: Net load of a grid system in the United States  Source: Cochran et al., 2014.  Demand-side management  Energy efficiency will reduce the overall capacity required and the rate of load  growth, enabling more sustainable and less expensive funding situations.  Demand-side management strategies such as demand response can facilitate  the use of renewables to serve a larger proportion of daily load and reduce the  need for large-scale storage by reducing peak, and shifting demand to match the  timing of variable generation. Demand response allows the shifting of loads by  getting end-users to shut off appliances and larger industrial machines at peak  times and to run those machines at specific off-peak hours instead, changing the  load profile to match the generation supply. This is especially important for  renewables as net load can change rapidly. It also allows demand to be met  flexibly and quickly and avoids the curtailment of solar and wind generation.  Role of storage  The need for storage depends on how many flexible resources can be  incorporated into the power system and on the shape of the demand profile.  Inexpensive batteries will facilitate electrification through micro-grids until the  centralized grid is extended to rural areas. Operational challenges due to the  variability of wind and solar can be alleviated by forecasting solar insolation and  wind speeds in order to plan electricity dispatch. In parallel, storage technologies  that offset the variations in solar electricity output need to be developed.  Batteries are not the only option, however. Sub-Saharan Africa could develop a  47 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  diverse generation portfolio and use spinning reserves to manage intermittent  generation from minutes to a few hours. Modern natural gas plants are designed  to ramp up rapidly at about 50 MW per minute. These, combined with smart grid  technologies such as improved sensing and control, will be sufficient to  accommodate most of the intermittency problems of renewable energy without  the need for additional storage. At very high penetrations of solar and wind,  distributed energy storage sites may be needed. The most inexpensive ways to  store electricity for the medium and long term are pumped hydroelectric and  compressed air. These are greatly restricted, however, by geographical  availability (Kenning, 2015). Apart from pumped hydropower storage using large  reservoirs, the most prevalent type of storage in sub-Saharan Africa currently  consists of batteries, mainly on the distributed scale for micro-grids. For example,  in Marsabit, Kenya, flywheels are used to manage the variability of a micro-grid  powered by wind and diesel (Kenning, 2015). Flywheel storage works by storing  electricity in the form of rotational kinetic energy in a fast-rotating wheel. It spins  faster to store energy and reduces its speed to discharge energy.  Overall, sub-Saharan Africa will require a mix of fast-ramp generation plants and  energy storage technologies to support high penetrations of renewables with the  least cost and environmental impact. Figure 19 shows the levelized cost of  various energy storage technologies at different scales of implementation  (Lazard, 2013), illustrating that a single technology can vary in levelized cost  depending on what services it provides to the electric grid.   Figure 19: Unsubsidized levelized cost of energy storage across various  technologies and grid service  Source: Lazard, 2013.  The future of nuclear power in sub-Saharan Africa  Nuclear energy, a low-carbon resource, could play a significant role in electrifying  sub-Saharan Africa, and there is interest across the region in ramping up this  form of generation. South Africa, the sole country in sub-Saharan Africa with  active nuclear power plants, is seeking to expand its capacity. However, nuclear  power has significant economic, environmental, and public safety risks. It has low  operating costs and high fuel density but is burdened by high upfront capital  costs. Nuclear plants are prone to long construction and licensing delays.  Nuclear power raises safety concerns, including the issue of how to dispose of  spent fuel and the risk of nuclear weapons proliferation accompanying the uptake  of nuclear power technology and fuel enrichment processes. Its overall cost is  about five times higher than the cost of natural gas generation. And the  estimated cost of decommissioning each plant, including used fuel and site  restoration costs is about $500 million (Chu & Majumdar, 2012). Small modular  nuclear reactors could alleviate the challenge of cost and construction overruns,  but the expertise and workforce required to safely adopt and operate nuclear  plants are still lacking in the region (Castellano et al., 2015). As the cost of solar  and wind decline and smart grid technologies including storage move forward, a  nuclear pathway will expose the region to comparatively greater financial risk and  energy insecurity (Chu & Majumdar, 2012).  49 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  POWER POOLS AS A FACILITATOR  Regional cooperation—fostered by power pools and cross-border transmission  networks—will be critical to closing the electricity gap in sub-Saharan Africa.  Such cooperation can offer economies of scale to small countries with limited  load. It can reduce the average cost of generation by pooling countries’  resources. It can help diversify countries’ energy portfolios and shield them from  price variability stemming from dependence on a single fuel or from hydropower  seasonality. And it can reduce dependence on fossil fuel imports by enabling  large concentrated renewable resources to be shared. For example, the benefits  of geothermal resources in Kenya can be shared with South Africa, which is  currently powered by coal, and hydropower in Central Africa can be shared with  Senegal (Castellano et al., 2015), which is currently powered by diesel.  But regional cooperation poses its own political and economic challenges. To  develop and operate power pools, member countries will need to find ways to  effectively collaborate. They will need mutual trust in the power capacities of  each country’s grid system. They must train local personnel and develop power  systems expertise. Finally, they must create effective international frameworks to  govern both the legal and technical aspects of the interconnections.  There are four power pools in sub-Saharan Africa:  • The Central Africa Power Pool, created in 2003, consists of Angola,  Burundi, Cameroon, Central African Republic, Chad, Congo, Democratic  Republic of the Congo (DRC), Equatorial Guinea, Gabon, and Sao Tome.  The CAPP is still in the development stage and is not yet operational.  • The Eastern Africa Power Pool (EAPP) was established in 2005 by seven  countries: Burundi, DRC, Egypt, Ethiopia, Kenya, Rwanda, and Sudan. It has  been adopted as a specialized institution to foster power system  interconnectivity by the heads of state of the Common Market for Eastern and  Southern Africa (COMESA). Since then, Libya, Tanzania, and Uganda have  joined the EAPP. The EAPP has released master plans and regional power  system studies and is projected to be fully operational within several years.  • The Southern Africa Power Pool was created in 1995 by 12 countries:  Angola, Botswana, DRC, Lesotho, Malawi, Mozambique, Namibia, South  Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Zambia, and Zimbabwe. It is the most advanced  and active power pool in the region, with international energy trades and  operational short-term energy markets.  • The West African Power Pool (WAPP) is a specialized institution of the  Economic Community of West African States (ECOWAS) and consists of 14  countries: Benin, Burkina Faso, Côte d’Ivoire, The Gambia, Ghana, Guinea,  Guinea-Bissau, Liberia, Mali, Niger, Nigeria, Senegal, Sierra Leone, and  Togo. The WAPP is still under development and is not yet operational.   In 2012, the Programme for Infrastructure Development in Africa was initiated by  the Africa Development Bank Group with a mandate to enhance cross-border  energy market development, among other priorities. The program includes four  electricity transmission corridors (not yet operational), three of which will be  based in sub-Saharan Africa:  • a north-south transmission line from Egypt to South Africa with branches in  East Africa,  • a transmission line from Angola to South Africa with branches in Central and  West Africa, and  • a West African transmission line linking Senegal and Ghana with several  branches in other countries.  51 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  7. DISTRIBUTED ENERGY  RESOURCES  Expanding centralized generation capacity is not the only way to electrify sub-  Saharan Africa. Off-grid and distributed energy systems now offer new  opportunities to close the electricity gap. Historically, these off-grid systems were  fueled by diesel, which presents a transport risk in remote areas. Now, owing to  the modular nature of renewable energy such as solar and small-scale  hydropower, most off-grid systems are powered renewably. Improved knowledge  and management of electric distribution systems will facilitate distributed energy  resources (DERs) such as rooftop and communal solar PV and battery systems.  THE POTENTIAL OF DISTRIBUTED ENERGY  RESOURCES  DERs have many advantages over centralized grid systems, such as reduced  power loss, scaled design, and suitability to renewable sources. In particular,  DERs have the potential to alleviate the social inequalities reinforced by  centralized grids. Existing grids in sub-Saharan Africa favor wealthier  communities, which lie in areas where the limited grid exists and which can afford  the relatively expensive connection fees, while rural communities are left with  limited options for electricity access. This intraregional electricity gap perpetuates  inequality by hindering the welfare development of those who are currently poor.  DERs in the form of micro-grids have the potential to bypass this challenge and  rapidly deliver power to communities without grid access.  Unlike transmission systems, distribution systems have in the past had little  operator monitoring. With the advent of smart grid technologies, sub-Saharan  Africa has the opportunity to make its grids receptive to DERs, taking pressure  off of centralized generation and increasing overall grid reliability. ICTs will be  critical to the success of DERs because they allow remote communication for  maintenance and repair, easy data analytics, and smart metering. DERs are  waiting on the right mix of catalysts, such as cheaper battery costs and smarter  ICTs, to drive unprecedented growth and deployment.  So far, the discourse on electricity access in sub-Saharan Africa has been  dominated by arguments that pit centralized solutions such as grid extension  against decentralized solutions such as mini-grids. Some argue that mini-grids  are incapable of supplying reliable and modern levels of energy services, while  others argue that grid extension is too slow and expensive to reach the millions   of people without electricity. These all-or-nothing arguments are based on the  outdated assumption that electricity provision must come from large-scale  centralized generation and grid networks commissioned by national  governments. In reality, to outpace the region’s growing rate of electricity poverty,  both solutions must be deployed in tandem and synergistically (Casillas &  Kammen, 2010). Micro-grids must be designed as a stopgap for main grid  extension for several years, and they must be seamlessly integrated with the  main grid when it arrives. Lack of integration may result in stranded energy  assets, which will deter investors from investing in small private energy firms that  may have the capacity to reach the remotest regions. Private micro-grid  companies need to be supported by national electric utilities and rural  electrification programs. Also, countries should build human capacity and enable  job creation by giving workers access to skills training on installing and  maintaining micro-grids. Finally, countries could also provide tax and import  incentives to micro-grid developers.  COMPARISON OF DECENTRALIZED ENERGY  TECHNOLOGIES  Strategies for deploying renewable electricity in off-grid areas include the use of  solar lanterns, solar home systems, and solar micro-grids. To cope with  intermittency, solar and wind micro-grids are often built as hybrid systems with  natural gas, biogas, or diesel. As the cost of energy storage declines, renewable  micro-grids can become the sole source of electricity in both grid and off-grid  areas (for an in-depth comparison of these technologies, see Part 2 of this  report).  Solar lanterns  Solar lanterns combine small photovoltaic panels with lighting fixtures. They are  sold as a single unit or as a PV panel with a set of lights that can be charged  during the day when the PV panel is generating electricity. In some parts of sub-  Saharan Africa, standalone solar lanterns are readily accessible and can be  found in supermarkets, hardware stores, gas station convenience stores, and  other small vendors. Because of the declining cost of solar PV technology, solar  lanterns can provide higher output and higher-quality lighting at the same or  lower cost as kerosene lamps and candles, which would otherwise provide  lighting. Because the fuel cost is zero, they also reduce the variable costs  associated with kerosene and other common lighting energy sources.  Solar lighting trade associations, like the Global Off-Grid Lighting Association  (GOGLA), and other organizations develop and enforce high quality standards to  advocate for policies that foster a better business environment for solar  53 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  companies. Despite these efforts, there are many inexpensive, poorly made solar  lanterns that draw in consumers but reach the end of their product lifetimes over  short periods of time, with few options for repair or maintenance.  Pico-solar and solar home systems  Pico-solar, or pico-PV, systems are very small solar PV systems that mainly  supply power for lighting and other relatively low-load applications like phone  charging. Capacities for pico-solar systems, as defined here, range from 1W to  10W. The cost of these systems, as well as larger-capacity solar home systems  (SHSs), has dropped over the past decade thanks to major decreases in  manufacturing and materials costs for PV panels. Solar technologies at various  capacity levels have also become more cost-effective options for off-grid  households owing to improvements in energy-efficient appliances and light bulbs,  particularly light-emitting diode (LED) technology. They have also benefited from  innovations in pricing and payment systems based on mobile phone banking  transactions and other ICT advances.  In East Africa, companies like M-Kopa Solar are deploying pico-solar systems as  a kit with several lighting and entertainment appliances. Consumers can  purchase these either by paying the full cost upfront or by paying in installments  over time using mobile money mechanisms such as M-PESA and Airtel MTN.  This pay-as-you-go (PAYG) business model has boosted electricity access for  communities without grid connections and without sufficient income to pay the  capital costs of a home-scale solar system upfront. M-Kopa systems consist of  8W solar panels that come with several LED lights, a rechargeable radio, and a  cell-phone charger. As of 2016, M-Kopa had connected more than 300,000  homes to solar power (PwC, 2016).  Companies marketing SHSs in emerging markets have, likewise, had success  using the PAYG model combined with mobile phone payment systems, whether  or not the systems are sold in tandem with appliances. Mobisol, a major supplier  of solar home systems in Rwanda and Tanzania, bundles different ranges of  solar PV panels (80W, 100W, 120W, and 200W arrays) with kits of direct-current  (DC) appliances (see Figure 20). Its most basic package is an 80W system with  seven LED lights, a mobile phone–charging station, and balance-of-system  components, such as wiring and switches. This system can support lighting  fixtures, charge multiple mobile phones, power a small radio, and run a television  for several hours. Mobisol’s largest system provides enough power to charge  laptops, run a DC refrigerator, and power a television for longer periods. Mobisol  has to date installed more than 3 MW of solar home system capacity in East  Africa—a testament to the PAYG business model and the appropriate product  scale for low-income and rising middle-class customers without central grid  access.   Figure 20: A sample 100W solar home system with kit of DC appliances  from Mobisol  Source: Mobisol, 2017.  Micro-grids  A micro-grid is a small-scale power generation and distribution system that  delivers electricity to multiple buildings in a village. Existing micro-grid projects in  sub-Saharan Africa are typically privately owned and operated, with the initial  capital for infrastructure investments coming from varied sources, including  donors, private debt and equity investors, and government grants or loans.  Micro-grids can also be owned and operated by a public utility or by a hybrid of  private and public models.  Micro-grids can provide electricity to even remote sites because innovations in  ICTs enable demand forecasting and pay-as-you-go services. Also, microgrids  do not require large investments and long construction times—although the  capital costs are still prohibitive for small and medium-sized entrepreneurs.  Diesel fuel prices are variable, and diesel delivery to remote areas can add  significantly to the transaction costs of electricity from a diesel generator.  However, diesel is easily stored, and its generator technology is mature and  standardized.  Renewable sources are now more affordable for use in micro-grids thanks to  rapid renewable project construction timelines, falling prices of solar and wind  technologies, and improving battery storage technologies. In addition, modern  ICT systems allow for less-costly remote operation, billing and customer  services, and mobile phone payment systems for customers in rural off-grid  communities. However, tariffs for electricity from renewable micro-grids are  usually higher than grid tariffs in urban areas because the micro-grids lack  economies of scale and do not benefit from the government subsidies on grid  tariffs.  55 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  Since renewable generation has no fuel cost, the decision to develop a diesel-based  or a solar PV micro-grid lies in the lifetime cost comparison between the  capital and fuel costs of the respective options. As capital costs for renewables  decrease, especially in solar, renewable-based micro-grids are becoming more  popular. Today, companies like PowerHive and PowerGen in Kenya are  developing micro-grids that rely on solar PV generation, along with a few wind  generation pilots, combined with battery storage, or hybrid renewable-diesel  micro-grid systems (Figure 21). A hybrid diesel micro-grid with storage  incorporated can supply electricity to consumers when wind speeds are too low  to make power or after the sun sets each day.  Figure 21: PowerGen project in Samburu County, Kenya showing a 3kW  micro-grid  Source: PowerGen, 2017.  The main challenge facing micro-grids today is high regulatory uncertainty about  the role and eventual fate of the physical assets if and when the central grid is  built out and able to offer cheaper tariffs. Designing micro-grids to eventually  connect to the central grid may reduce the uncertainty around micro-grid  investments and change the nature of the energy services provided by the microgrid.  For example, a grid-connected micro-grid may evolve from an on-site  generator into a power purchaser from the central grid, functioning as a small  distributor of power to its existing household connections. To alleviate market  uncertainty in the financing of micro-grid projects, a general regulatory framework  for micro-grids could be put in place to clearly define how micro-grids can be  licensed and managed. Policy changes of this nature may already be in motion in  countries like Kenya.   The cost of electricity shapes the services people use and their demand for  electricity. If electricity is expensive, households will use it only to access  services that are highly valued, that require small amounts of energy, and that  can only be provided by electricity (such as charging cell phones) or for which  electricity does a better job of providing the service (such electric light versus  candles). Likewise, households will refrain from using electricity for tasks that use  large amounts of energy and for which substitute sources of energy might be  available, such as cooking, which can be done using solid fuels. As prices fall,  the number of services a household can access increases. As a result, the  services any household is willing to access is related to the generation  technology that determines the price of electricity. Figure 22 shows the  relationship between the price per unit of energy to consumers and the energy  services demanded for power from the centralized grid, a micro-grid, a solar  home system, a solar lamp, a kerosene lamp, and batteries. In many parts of  sub-Saharan Africa, the supply of electricity through the centralized grid can be  unpredictable, with power shortages occurring in peak demand periods.  Depending on the quality and consistency of service from the centralized grid,  some customers may prefer to pay a premium for power produced by a reliable  micro-grid rather than for unpredictable power from the centralized grid.  Figure 22: Per-unit energy price versus level-of-service chart for various  energy technologies  Source: Schnitzer et al., 2014.  Achieving high penetration of renewables in sub-Saharan Africa presents  challenges related to achieving system flexibility and gaining access to financing,  57 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  but it also creates opportunities stemming from, for example, operational power  pools and smart grid technologies that can lead to affordable clean electricity,  reduced emissions, and less pollution. Policy-makers must consider all of these  factors holistically to enable the development of a low-carbon grid.   8. CASE STUDIES OF  CENTRALIZED CAPACITY  EXPANSION  Vetting possible pathways to closing the electricity gap in sub-Saharan Africa will  require modeling of the region’s power systems. Existing analyses at the pan-  African level estimate that capacity will grow annually at around 8–13%,  expanding by 50–200 GW by 2025 (Bazilian et al., 2012; Sanoh et al., 2014;  Sparrow et al., 2002). Yet modeling future power systems in sub-Saharan Africa  will need to be context specific, varying from country to country, and there is little  research in the literature on national-level sustainable power system expansion  for individual countries. Power systems modeling of many countries in the region  is challenging because of the lack of reliable and accurate data. Some countries,  like Kenya, Nigeria, and South Africa (IRENA, 2015), have made considerable  effort to record their power systems data, but even in these cases some data are  not available in the public domain and access remains a challenge for  researchers and analysts. Instead of a pan-continental model of all of sub-  Saharan Africa based on unrealistic data, we attempt to illustrate the trade-offs of  various capacity expansion pathways to closing the electricity gap through case  studies of Kenya and Nigeria, where we have obtained reliable power systems  data. The capacity expansion model2 determines the least-cost pathway to  expanding electricity generation over a time horizon (usually 20 years into the  future) and compares the associated economic, environmental, and social  impacts of these pathways.  Text Box 4: Modeling energy systems  This analysis focuses on quantifying the grid-based electricity supply needed to meet  demand growth. The capacity expansion model determines the financially optimal  generation portfolio for Kenya and Nigeria based on inputs such as the energy resource  potential of the region, the existing installed capacity, average capacity factors, and peak  contribution of each generation technology.  COUNTRY PROFILES  Kenya is chosen because it is one of the region’s fastest-growing economies,  with abundant renewable energy sources, yet only about 40% of its population  2  See the model description in the Appendix.  59 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  has reliable electricity access. Nigeria is selected because it has the largest  economy in Africa, with crippling electricity shortages in the midst of abundant  renewable and fossil resources. Only about 50% of its population has reliable  electricity access.  Kenya  Electricity in Kenya is distributed by the Kenya Power and Lighting Company  (KLPC), which serves just over 2 million customers with a peak grid-based  demand of around 1,250 MW. The installed generation capacity is about 2 GW:  44% hydroelectric, 36% fossil fuels (diesel and gas), 22% geothermal, and 0.3%  wind power (Ackermann et al., 2014). Kenya is well positioned to integrate large  amounts of renewables owing to its abundance of geothermal, wind, and  hydropower, which are relatively cheap. It has rapidly added generation capacity  over the past decade and made impressive progress in providing access to clean  and affordable electricity. However, Kenya also had plans to add 4,500 MW of  coal by 2030.  Nigeria  Nigeria is Africa’s largest oil producer and in 2012 was the world’s fourth largest  exporter of liquefied natural gas. Nigeria’s installed capacity is about 13 GW—  based on 70% natural gas and about 30% hydropower—and it has a peak gridbased  demand of about 4,500 MW. Only about 3 GW of its installed capacity is  operational, however, owing to gas unavailability, water shortages, and  infrastructure breakdown. Altogether, about 2.7 GW of generation capacity is lost  owing to gas constraints in a country with one of the largest natural gas deposits  in the world, up to 0.5 GW is lost to poor water management (Ley et al., 2015).  Nigeria is not on track to meet many of its generation capacity expansion targets  published in 2006 (Gujba et al., 2010). Because of these challenges, Nigeria  decided to privatize the electricity sector in 2013. The benefits of this move will  take time to become apparent as the sector restructures. Nigeria is well  positioned to integrate large amounts of renewables thanks to its abundance of  hydropower and natural gas resources, which can provide the necessary  operational flexibility.  METHODOLOGY  The optimization model requires a set of common input variables: a portfolio of  existing and potential resources; projections for variable (fuel) and capital costs;  annual load forecasts; and characterization of the operational features of the  different energy technologies such as resource potential, average capacity factor,  and peak contribution. The portfolio of future resources considered are   hydropower, geothermal, natural gas and coal, wind, solar photovoltaic, and  diesel. The model considers all existing plants in the Kenyan and Nigerian power  systems as of 2015. It outputs the annual investment required for the least-cost  generation portfolio constrained to meet annual load and peak demand.  The model accounts for non-dispatchable renewables and net load variability by  using a peak contribution factor. For example, solar capacity additions in the  model contribute 0% capacity to peak demand because Kenya and Nigeria have  an evening peak demand, when solar is not available (Figure 9). The model also  includes a 15% capacity reserve margin to account for reliability. It does not have  high geospatial and temporal (hourly) resolution, a trade-off that permits  reasonable estimates without large data requirements that would be prohibitive  given the state of data availability in some regions of sub-Saharan Africa. This  approach also allows for clear sensitivity analysis by duplicating the model over  varying scenarios and illustrating the trade-offs in terms of costs, fuel choices,  and policy targets. The model’s generation capacity estimates are conservative  because it includes the peak contribution factor that accounts for the availability  of renewables, and its cost estimates are also conservative because it excludes  the cost of upgrading existing infrastructure. Therefore, the results should be  interpreted as the least estimate of expansion capacity and cost required to  alleviate the electricity poverty in the region.  Generation plants are lumped into resource categories: solar PV, wind, biomass,  small hydro, large hydro, coal, geothermal, natural gas, and diesel. Natural gas is  split into combined cycle and combustion turbine to include variations in how the  plants run as baseload or peak capacity. The cost of each resource is split into  annualized capital cost ($/kW-yr) and variable cost ($/kWh).  The most recent World Bank commodity price forecasts are used for coal, oil (for  diesel and fuel oil), and liquefied natural gas (LNG) (Baffes, 2016). On average,  the coal price is $50 a ton, oil is $50 a barrel, and natural gas is $9–12 per  MMBtu. Solar PV cost forecasts are taken from a 2015 study developed by the  German Fraunhofer Institute (Mayer et al., 2015). Wind, combined cycle, gas  turbine, combustion turbine, and coal unit costs come from a 2013 report by the  U.S. Energy Information Administration (EIA, 2013). For wind, we assume a  linear trend in capital cost reduction of 2% a year, in line with empirical results  (Wiser & Bolinger, 2016). Geothermal unit costs are taken from Kenya’s leastcost  power development plans.  SCENARIOS  The initial least-cost scenario does not have any additional constraints and is  referred to the business-as-usual (BAU) scenario. Other environmental and other  policy scenarios are explored using additional model constraints. Scenarios are  61 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  chosen based on pertinent realities in each county. Kenya has plans to build  about 4,500 MW of coal to keep up with its demand growth. Nigeria’s generation  mix is currently dominated by natural gas and hydropower. Both countries are  adopting energy efficiency measures as outlined in their power plans. The impact  of a carbon tax is explored as well, in line with current global discussions on  accounting for the environmental externalities of fossil fuel use.  The optimal generation expansion pathways through 2035 for Kenya and Nigeria  are based on the following scenarios:  Kenya  1. BAU: This scenario finds the least-cost expansion pathway using a 10%  annual demand growth rate.  2. Low load: This scenario is based on reduced load and peak demand  forecasts, assuming energy efficiency strategies.  3. Coal: This scenario constrains the model to install 1,920 MW of coal by  2020 and 4,500 MW of coal by 2030, according to Kenya’s medium-term  plans.  4. Carbon tax: This scenario adds a $40/ton CO2 tax starting in 2016,  based on the social cost of carbon.  5. Carbon tax + 2030 coal: This scenario constrains the model by adding a  $40/ton CO2 tax starting in 2016 and installing 4,500 MW of coal in 2030.  Nigeria  1. BAU: This scenario finds the least-cost expansion pathway using a 6%  annual demand growth rate.  2. Low load: This scenario is based on reduced load and peak demand  forecasts, assuming energy efficiency measures.  3. Gas and hydropower: This scenario restricts resource potential to  natural gas and hydropower only to reflect Nigeria’s current fuel choices.  4. Carbon tax: This scenario constrains the model by adding a $40/ton CO2  tax starting in 2016, based on the social cost of carbon.  Figures 23–26 display the results in terms of the incremental generation capacity  needed in five-year increments—that is, how much additional capacity will be  needed in each five-year period to meet the conditions of each scenario by 2035.  Tables 2–5 show the total cost and levelized cost of each scenario’s generation  portfolio.   Business-as-usual scenario  The model results show that Kenya’s load growth can be met sustainably and  cost-effectively predominantly with geothermal and wind resources, together with  some natural gas (Figure 23). Coal is not an economically optimal choice. Most  of Kenya’s generation capacity additions occur later in the time horizon, between  2030 and 2035.  Figure 23: Incremental capacity expansion under the BAU scenario in  Kenya  Nigeria will need more generation capacity than its current plans to meet its  existing demand and forecasted demand growth. Nigeria has so much unmet  demand today compared with its existing capacity that more than 10 GW of  additional capacity is required every five years. The least-cost expansion  pathway for Nigeria includes hydropower, natural gas, and solar PV (Figure 24).  Coal is not economically optimal in this case either. Generation expansion plans  must be coupled with extensive transmission and distribution system upgrades  (those costs are not included here).  63 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  Figure 24: Incremental capacity expansion under the BAU scenario in  Nigeria  Coal scenario in Kenya  Generation technology choices will be locked in for at least 30 years because  generation assets are long-lived and time is required to recover investments in  them. Therefore, it is important to demonstrate the significant economic and  environmental and social trade-offs involved in transitioning to a low-carbon grid.  To determine the trade-offs of coal development in Kenya, the model was  constrained to include Kenya’s plans of 4,500 MW of coal in 2030. Coal is not  identified as the least-cost electricity source in any of the scenarios examined for  Kenya and Nigeria. Under our assumptions, the model shows that Kenya’s plan  to add 4,500 MW of coal by 2030 increases generation costs by about $2 billion  in 2035 compared with the BAU pathway. The model shows that coal displaces  geothermal generation, which is a clean and cheap baseload generation source  (Figure 25).  Coal development will result in significant environmental and public health risks  for local communities in Kenya’s Kitui and Lamu Counties, where the local coal is  found, and also in coastal areas for imported coal. It locks Kenya into a  technology many countries are eschewing. Operationally, coal provides baseload  capacity and cannot rapidly respond to system variations as natural gas does. If  it chooses to develop coal plants, Kenya may still need to add flexibility to its  system in the form of gas turbines, diesel engines, or energy storage.   Figure 25: Incremental capacity expansion under the coal scenario in  Kenya  Gas and hydropower scenario in Nigeria  If Nigeria restricts generation options to hydropower and natural gas, as it  currently has, its generation costs over 2016–2035 will be $6.5 billion more than  a diversified BAU pathway that includes solar PV. Developing Nigeria’s  renewable resources and reducing its dependence on natural gas and  hydropower is the economically sound expansion pathway and has the added  benefit of preserving the environment. The magnitude of incremental capacity  required from 2025 to 2035 appears less when only natural gas is chosen  because gas has a higher capacity value than solar, so fewer megawatts of gas  are needed to meet the same amount of load (Figure 26). This does not mean,  however, that it is a cheaper expansion pathway (Table 2).  65 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  Figure 26: Incremental capacity expansion under the natural gas and  hydropower scenario in Nigeria  Low load scenario  In the low-load scenario, energy efficiency strategies for achieving lower-than-expected  demand growth in Kenya would lead to reductions in total cumulative  capacity of about 5 GW and savings of about $5 billion (about 25%) in total  generation costs compared with the BAU scenario (Table 1). Similarly, a low-load  scenario featuring energy-efficient growth in Nigeria could save 7 GW of new  capacity installment and $10 billion (about 11%) in system generation costs (  Table 2). In these scenarios, the same types of generation resources are chosen,  but less of each resource is deployed, resulting in lower costs.  Carbon tax scenario  Because of the availability and affordability of geothermal and wind resources in  Kenya, and solar and hydropower in Nigeria, the BAU scenarios result in clean-energy  portfolios without the need to internalize emissions damage through cost  instruments such as carbon taxes. By 2035 the share of annual generation  coming from renewable sources, excluding large hydropower, would be 90% in  Kenya (due to its abundant geothermal resources) and about 30% in Nigeria.  As a result, the carbon tax scenario, which applies a carbon tax of $40/ton of  CO2, has no significant impact on the types of resources used to fill the electricity  gap. In Kenya the carbon tax increases costs by $0.5 billion, about 2% of the   least-cost pathway, because the BAU mix there is already dominated by lowcarbon  technologies. In Nigeria it increases costs by about $10 billion, about 10%  of the least-cost pathway, because Nigeria relies more heavily on natural gas.  If Kenya proceeds with future coal plans, however, a carbon tax will have  significant impacts. Including a carbon tax in the 4,500 MW plan for coal  increases cost by more than $6 billion compared with the BAU scenario.  SUMMARY OF RESULTS    PATHWAY TRADE-OFFS  Given the abundance of renewable resources on the continent, countries have  significant potential to use variable renewable energy to provide baseload  capacity by integrating geographically diversified sources and employing existing  grid flexibility as described. This ability depends partly on the existing fuel mix of  the grid, but because power systems in sub-Saharan Africa are relatively young,  expansion could be carried out strategically to accommodate large penetrations  of variable renewable resources. For example, countries with large hydropower  and natural gas capacities in existing grids can cost-effectively transition to large-scale  integration of renewable resources (as seen in the Kenya and Nigeria case  studies), and even more so by enabling regional energy trading.  Fossil fuels will play a role in the region’s transition because of its existing  installed capacity and the ability of resources such as natural gas and diesel to  provide system flexibility. As energy storage costs decline, the need for gas and  diesel may be displaced. Although renewable generation now has costs similar to  that of fossil fuels and avoids the associated environmental risks, a 100%  renewable grid will require large-scale storage owing to load fluctuations,  unexpected weather changes, unexpected plant and grid outages, and solar and  wind variability.  The economic, environmental, and political trade-offs and impacts of sub-  Saharan Africa’s fuel choices, as seen through the case studies are the following:  1. Coal development will subject communities to significant environmental  degradation and public health risks. This risk exposure is unnecessary  because cheap renewable alternatives are available, as shown in Kenya  and Nigeria. In countries without cheaper and cleaner alternatives to coal,  regional cooperation through power pools offers a viable way of meeting  electricity demand sustainably. The Kenya and Nigeria case studies show  that governments should consider coal development plans carefully and  cautiously. They also underline the need for accessible data on the power  systems of other countries in the region, because the potential  environmental costs of choosing coal today are large.  2. Building coal power plants today as a stopgap on the way to transitioning  to renewable energy may cause path dependency and lock countries into  a suboptimal expansion pathway that is economically and  environmentally expensive.  3. Power systems built for coal are different from power systems built for  renewables, and deploying coal today may thus determine system  characteristics, such as operational flexibility, that may limit future  integration of renewables.  69 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  4. There are economic trade-offs between low-capital-cost/high-variable-cost  resources (typically coal, natural gas, and diesel) and high-capital-cost/  low-variable-cost resources (typically renewables such as solar and  wind). These trade-offs are important to consider for capital-scarce sub-  Saharan countries and may also have implications for countries’ trade  balance and exposure to financial risks.  SUMMARY  This chapter demonstrates the economic, environmental, and operational tradeoffs  involved in filling the electricity gap in sub-Saharan Africa, but these tradeoffs  are context specific and require power system modeling, which is prohibitive  for many countries in the region owing to the lack of data. The case studies of  Kenya and Nigeria show that renewables are cost competitive and that fuels  such as natural gas can play a role in providing system flexibility until grid  storage costs decline. The case studies also show that the scale of centralized  generation expansion required to meet moderate load growth by 2035 is  significant compared with many countries’ historical investments in power  systems and rate of system expansion. The region has underinvested for a  number of years: current investment in sub-Saharan electricity systems is about  US$8 billion a year. This is inadequate to overcome the existing shortfall in  infrastructure, to expand access and coverage, and to meet growth in demand  (Cartwright, 2015). Grid-based power generation capacity in all of sub-Saharan  Africa increased by 22 GW from 2000 to 2012, from about 68 GW to 90 GW, with  South Africa alone accounting for about half of the total (IEA, 2014). The model  shows that Nigeria alone will have to install at least an additional 36 GW by 2035  to keep up with grid-based load growth alone.  To achieve full electricity access, sub-Saharan Africa must rely on a combination  of many pathways and strategies, such as synergies between centralized and  distributed energy systems, bolstered financial support and investment, and  improved institutional capacity and management. Providing affordable and  reliable electricity for all in sub-Saharan Africa will require unprecedented  financial, social, and political efforts.   9. CONCLUSION  This report has provided an account of the state of the power sector in sub-  Saharan Africa, and the challenges and opportunities of various power expansion  pathways. We have shown that the renewable energy potential in the region is  abundant, and the costs are declining and reaching parity with conventional  generation resources. We have also shown that the investment and planned use  of fossil fuels should be judicious given that decades of its development in the  region have done little to increase energy access. It is critical that fuel choices be  considered cautiously, particularly coal, which proved to be a costly pathway to  electrification in Kenya and Nigeria. The successful transition to high  penetrations of renewables will depend on various sources of system flexibility,  particularly natural gas and grid storage, and on the effective operation of  regional power pools. Also, we emphasize that distributed and centralized energy  systems will have to be strategically deployed to operate in synergy and  complement each other over their operational lifetimes.  Lack of data access and availability in sub-Saharan Africa hinders robust power  system analysis from informing many countries’ policy decisions. This situation  risks locking the region into a development path that is economically and  environmentally suboptimal for its people. Attaining 100% electricity access  rapidly across the region will require a mix of pathways and scales.  The narrative around the electricity gap in sub-Saharan Africa has been  dominated by disconnected questions. Where should supply come from—fossil  fuels or renewables? What scale of infrastructure should be deployed to reach  unconnected populations—centralized grid extensions or distributed systems? In  contrast, we redefine the electricity gap as an integral problem that involves  supply-demand mismatches, inequality, and electricity access decisions—it is  ultimately a social and technical challenge. In our view, the conventional  approach relying on fossil fuels and grid extensions is being superseded by a  new paradigm based on renewable resources and scale-appropriate  technologies. These elements will be at the core of public and private decisions  to empower sub-Saharan Africa in the coming decades.  71 Generating energy for sustainable and equitable development  