OXFAM  RESEARCH BACKGROUNDER  The energy challenge  in sub-Saharan  Africa: A guide for  advocates and policy  makers  Part 2: Addressing energy  poverty  James Morrissey  2017    Series editor: Kimberly Pfeifer  Oxfam’s Research Backgrounders are designed to inform and foster discussion  about topics critical to poverty reduction. The series explores a range of issues  on which Oxfam works—all within the broader context of international  development and humanitarian relief. The series was designed to share Oxfam’s  rich research with a wide audience in hopes of fostering thoughtful debate and  discussion. All Backgrounders are available as downloadable PDFs on our  website, , and may be distributed and cited with  proper attribution (please see following page).  Topics of Oxfam’s Research Backgrounders are selected to support Oxfam’s  development objectives or key aspects of our policy work. Each Backgrounder  represents an initial effort by Oxfam to inform the strategic development of our  work, and each is either a literature synthesis or original research, conducted or  commissioned by Oxfam America. All Backgrounders have undergone peer  review.  Oxfam’s Research Backgrounders are not intended as advocacy or campaign  tools; nor do they constitute an expression of Oxfam policy. The views expressed  are those of the authors—not necessarily those of Oxfam. Nonetheless, we  believe this research constitutes a useful body of work for all readers interested  in poverty reduction.  For a full list of available Backgrounders, please see the “Research  Backgrounder Series Listing” section of this report.  Author information and acknowledgments  James Morrissey is a researcher at Oxfam America who works on issues of  energy, climate, and extractive industries.  This work was generously funded by the Nathan Cummings Foundation. The  report benefited greatly from the comments and inputs of Sasanka Thilakasiri,  Thomas Damassa, Nkiruka Avilla, Daniel Kammen, Subhes Bhattacharyya, Vijay  Modi, John McGrath, Gawain Kripke, Heather Coleman, and Kimberly Pfeifer.   4  Citations of this paper  Please use the following format when citing this paper:  Morrissey, James, “The energy challenge in sub-Saharan Africa: A guide for  advocates and policy makers: Part 2: Addressing energy poverty” Oxfam  EXECUTIVE SUMMARY  Energy poverty is a stark problem in sub-Saharan Africa. Currently 633 million  people are estimated to lack access to electricity, and 792 million people are  forced to cook with traditional biomass on unimproved cookstoves. While efforts  at electrification are expected to bring down the number of people who do not  have access to electricity, the number of people using unimproved cooking  facilities is expected to increase through 2030.  Energy-poor households suffer from a wide range of impacts, from increased risk  of premature death due to indoor pollution to forgone productivity gains and lower  quality of life. On top of these impacts, energy-poor households must spend a  greater proportion of their income to meet their basic energy needs. They also  spend more time engaging in energy-intensive tasks than do wealthier  households who have access to modern energy sources.  Past efforts to address energy poverty have focused on promoting energy  access. Historically these efforts have centered on providing people with  electricity, resulting in a binary measure of energy poverty in which people are  either “connected” or “not connected.” More recent research has shed light on  the complex ways in which households use energy, showing that it is determined  by a variety of factors, including the affordability, reliability, and quality of the  energy sources available. The result has been an evolution toward a tiered  measure of energy access. Overall energy access is hypothesized to offer  significant benefits, providing access to services (such as street lighting and  schools), improving welfare, driving better health and environmental outcomes,  and promoting economic development.  This report forms the second of a two-part series. It is an effort to explore the  technological opportunities for addressing energy poverty, as well as the  policy challenges involved in promoting and deploying these technologies.  The first report deals with questions regarding the role of fossil fuels in closing  the energy gap in sub-Saharan Africa. Overall this series finds that addressing  energy poverty will require a mix of technologies. Within these, there are a  number of important areas that policy advocates can focus on as levers to  promote effective efforts to address energy poverty.  In the policy environment surrounding energy access, a major focus has fallen on  providing access to electricity, and recent changes in the price of renewable  energy technologies have sparked debate about the best way to do so. Different  approaches include the following technologies:  1. Large-scale grids. Expanding the electrical grid is the most established  approach to providing access to electricity. Electricity supplied by the grid is  7 Addressing energy poverty  available at the lowest tariffs because the grid offers opportunities to exploit  economies of scale. A large-scale grid can also integrate large amounts of  renewable energy. Expanding the grid, however, involves high up-front costs,  and the ability to take advantage of economies of scale is limited in sub-  Saharan Africa, where populations are dispersed and have limited ability to  pay for electricity. Finally, the grid’s physical characteristics mean that it  operates as an almost perfect monopoly and as such is best managed as a  regulated utility. In sub-Saharan Africa, where regulation is often weak,  utilities have performed notoriously poorly.  2. Mini-grids. Although mini-grids involve lower up-front costs than expanding  the grid on a large scale, they are still capable of supplying electricity in  quantities that can match the services supplied by the grid. However, the  current high cost of renewable components and battery storage means that  electricity from mini-grids tends to be more expensive than that provided by  the grid. Notably, future reductions in the cost of renewable components and  storage are not expected to fully close this gap. This challenge is particularly  significant given the low incomes of energy-poor households. In addition,  although the up-front costs of mini-grids are lower than grid expansion, they  are still high compared with the incomes of local entrepreneurs - who might  be expected to finance and run such grids. There are a variety of ways to  address the high costs of electricity from mini-grids, but they all require the  creation of bespoke energy systems, which limit the technology’s ability to be  deployed for mass electrification. This challenge is exacerbated by the  current lack of technically trained personnel in sub-Saharan Africa who could  design and maintain such energy systems.  3. Solar home systems (SHSs). SHSs can supply electricity to isolated  households that are too dispersed to be connected through mini-grids.  However, SHSs suffer from limited capacity, which is sufficient only for  lighting, information and communication technologies (ICTs), entertainment,  and cooling. In addition, electricity from SHSs is more expensive than  electricity from both the grid and mini-grids. Although SHSs can provide  households with basic quantities of electricity, they can also suffer from  regulatory issues and be compromised in conditions where theft of solar  panels is a problem and where demand on the system grows rapidly.  4. Solar appliances. Solar appliances provide electrification on an even smaller  scale than SHSs and therefore result in the lowest up-front cost, but also the  highest cost of electricity of all the technologies mentioned here.  Nonetheless, given the high value placed on electrical energy for lighting,  electronics, and cooling, solar appliances have been observed to generate  rapid transitions in household energy economies. Challenges around  promoting solar appliances pertain to ensuring their quality and socializing  people to the potential advantages of electric energy sources.   8  Although access to electricity has received a disproportionate amount of attention  within energy access efforts, electrification alone—whether supplied via the grid  or distributed technologies—has only limited effects on energy poverty.  1. In terms of household energy poverty, households tend to use electricity for  illumination, electronic devices (ICTs and entertainment), and some cooling.  Newly connected households do not tend to use electricity to meet their  thermal energy needs (cooking and heating).  2. Regarding the impacts of electrification on economic development, the  empirical literature is ambiguous. Some cases document generalizable and  significant improvements in household incomes as a result of electrification;  other empirical works find that electrification has few, if any, impacts on  economic development. Overall, I take this to mean that electricity can play  an important role in driving economic development, but this role depends on  the existence of complementary policies, infrastructure, and services.  3. The impact of electrification on the availability of services (such as street  lighting, schools, and clinics) is not well studied in the literature. The greatest  impact appears to result from the improved quality of life made possible by  electrification, which makes trained service providers (teachers, nurses,  government bureaucrats) more willing to reside in remote rural areas.  Overall, while electrification is expected to lead to important improvements in  welfare as well as some conditional economic development, it will not address  the dangers of cooking with solid and liquid fuels. Efforts to tackle energy poverty  therefore must go beyond electrification only.  Promoting access to improved cookstoves and more modern cooking fuels have  been the mainstays of efforts to address the challenges of cooking with solid  biomass. Although improved cookstoves are relatively cheap and simple  technologies and have been a focus of development efforts for more than years, their uptake has been frustratingly slow. Efforts to promote improved  cookstoves have been bolstered recently by international efforts such as the  Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves, but more still needs to be done to ensure  access to improved cooking facilities in households. Promoting modern fuels  requires the use of modern appliances—and therefore suffers the same  challenges as improved cookstoves—but is also frustrated by supply chain  problems. In addition, efforts to promote access to modern fuels through  subsidies have been shown to raise complicated problems of leakage to nonpoor  groups.  Biogas digesters have been touted as a potential alternative source of energy  for cooking, but efforts to promote biodigesters have proven that, despite the  simplicity of the technology, they are difficult to roll out for the purposes of  promoting energy access. Their maintenance has also proved challenging.  9 Addressing energy poverty  With this array of technical opportunities for addressing energy poverty, the  following issues will be important for policy advocates focused on improving  energy access and addressing energy poverty in sub-Saharan Africa:  1. Efforts to address energy poverty will need to focus on both the grid and  distributed technologies. The grid will provide the cheapest energy and  allow for the greatest penetration of renewables at the lowest cost. Rolling it  out, however, will be costly and slow, so distributed generation technologies  should be used to help increase access to electricity. To this end, energy  policies should promote a mix of technologies based on considerations such  as population and income density, distance from the grid, resource  availability, and terrain.  2. Support for distributed technologies must not only cover the higher upfront  costs for the technology, but also support the development of the  entire supply chain. This means reducing the cost of renewable  components and offering appropriate training to the individuals who will be  needed to site, install, manage, and maintain these systems.  3. To support the expansion of the grid, energy policy will need to focus on  reducing the cost of connections. In addition, because the arrival of the  grid threatens the sustainability of distributed technologies, plans for grid  expansion need to be transparent, with explicit mechanisms for  integrating distributed technologies into the grid when it arrives.  4. To ensure that electrification is sustainable, it must be accompanied by  economic development. Electrification thus needs to be undertaken  within the context of a broader set of development efforts. This will  include making sure that complementary services, infrastructure, and policies  are rolled out along with electricity access.  5. Even if policies effectively address all of the above challenges, the poorest  households will still likely require subsidies in order to meet their basic energy  needs. At the same time, tariffs will have to be set high enough to ensure the  long-term sustainability of any energy infrastructure. In this respect a central  feature of energy policy will be striking the correct balance between tariff  rates and subsidies.  6. Although developments in renewable energy technologies are changing the  possibilities for improving electricity access, there is a danger that advocacy  communities will focus solely on the technologies of energy delivery and  ignore the institutional context. Experience rolling out these new technologies  suggests that the institutional context will remain of central importance, and  thus core development concerns about governance and accountability  should remain priorities, regardless of the technology being deployed.   7. Policy makers have long prioritized electrification over addressing energy  needs for cooking, and current efforts promoting improved cookstoves will  likely be insufficient to address energy poverty. The number of people  cooking with traditional biomass is expected to increase through 2030.  Because biomass is expected to play a significant role in household energy  economies, energy policy should include an explicit effort to manage  solid biomass in a sustainable way.  8. Issues of financing will lie at the heart of efforts to roll out energy access.  Financing will be needed not only for new infrastructure, but also for  subsidies to support energy access among the poorest populations. At the  moment, public and donor financing is insufficient to meet the investment  needs, and as such there is an imperative to use public and donor finance  to leverage private investment.  11 Addressing energy poverty  1. INTRODUCTION  Access to energy is fundamental to human welfare. We need energy to cook our  food and heat our homes. We use illumination after the sun goes down to extend  our productive hours and provide us with huge improvements in quality of life.  Beyond these basic functions, we rely on energy to provide services such as  telecommunications, health care, and education as well as many of the  conveniences available to people in modern economies. Without access to  modern and efficient fuels, households are forced to rely on polluting and  dangerous sources of energy such as the burning of dung, charcoal, and  kerosene.  Energy poverty presents a serious challenge in sub-Saharan Africa. Despite  longstanding efforts to address energy poverty, in 2014, 633 million people  lacked access to electricity and 792 million people relied on traditional biomass  as their primary energy source for cooking (IEA, 2016). The result is drudgery,  poisoning, fires, burns, limited economic opportunity, and premature death due to  respiratory diseases.  Whereas developing Asia contains the largest number of people without access  to modern cooking facilities, sub-Saharan Africa contains the largest number  without access to electricity. Sub-Saharan Africa is also home to the largest  number of countries with the lowest rates of electrification and has the highest  rates of people forced to cook using traditional biomass. Furthermore, whereas  Asia is expected to see declines in the total number of people living in energy  poverty, in sub-Saharan Africa population growth is outstripping the rate at which  people are transitioning away from solid biomass for cooking. Based on current  trends, the number of people in sub-Saharan Africa who are forced to burn solid  biomass in unimproved cookstoves is expected to rise to 823 million by 2030.  Notably, however, recent efforts focusing on electrification are expected to drive  down the number of people lacking electricity through to 2040 (see Table 1).  Table 1: Predicted changes in energy-poor populations in sub-Saharan  Africa, 2014–202014 2030 20Number of people without access to electricity (millions) 633 619 4Number of people reliant on traditional biomass for  cooking (millions)  792 823 7Source: IEA, 2016.   When considering the state of energy access and energy poverty in sub-Saharan  Africa, it is important to remember that regional and national averages can  obscure vast disparities in levels of energy access between and within countries.  Some countries, such as South Sudan and Burundi, have electrification rates in  the single digits, whereas the small island states of Mauritius and the Seychelles  have energy access rates of 100 percent (see Figure 1).  Figure 1: Rates of electricity access across sub-Saharan Africa countries  13 Addressing energy poverty  More needs to be done to address energy poverty in sub-Saharan Africa. Yet  Africa faces challenges in using fossil fuels to generate electricity. Fossil fuels  are susceptible to major variations in price that have significant impacts on the  economic viability of electricity production. Burning fossil fuels in power plants  creates significant health risks as a result of dangerous smog. Finally, the  burning of fossil fuels drives climate change, which threatens to compromise food  security, drive sea-level rise, exacerbate drought and flood events, and increase  exposure to disease (Boko et al., 2007; Goodes, 2011; Kundzewicz et al., 2007;  Nicholls & Mimura, 1998; Schlenker & Lobell, 2010; Tanser et al., 2003).  Although Africa’s limited role in driving climate change means that the its citizens  should not shoulder the burden of addressing it—especially not when considering  the grave levels of impoverishment represented by current levels of energy  poverty—Africa’s vulnerability to climate change does give it a real incentive to  seek to minimize its greenhouse gas emissions where possible.  While the task of addressing energy poverty and limiting greenhouse gas  emissions seems daunting, price reductions in a number of renewable energy  technologies are creating new possibilities for achieving energy access in Africa,  and as such the policy discussion over how best to prioritize energy investments  is changing rapidly. Many actors now call for a complete overhaul of the  traditional focus on investing in centralized power generation and expanding the  grid. Instead, they call for a focus on distributed renewable energy technologies,  which are believed to be cheaper, faster to deploy, and not reliant on the slow  and bureaucratic power utilities that have served African countries so poorly in  the past. In addition, such energy sources are thought to mitigate the local  emissions from large, centralized, fossil fuel–burning power stations, which  currently impose major health costs on surrounding communities. Other actors  reject this argument, suggesting that a distributed approach is incapable of  supplying power in the quantities required. Assessing the merits of these  arguments is challenging owing to the technical characteristics of energy  technologies, the rapidly changing prices of renewable components, and the  complex economics and financing questions that dominate the energy sector.  This is the context that frames this report. The report sets out to review the  challenges posed by energy poverty in sub-Saharan Africa and explore the  possibilities for addressing it while minimizing greenhouse gas emissions. The  report is intended to be an accessible appraisal of potential technologies and  approaches for expanding access to electricity, including grid expansion and  distributed technologies. The report also considers the potential for improved  cookstoves to provide people with access to safe cooking facilities. In all cases  the report emphasizes the challenges surrounding the available technologies and  highlights the policy requirements for addressing such challenges. In this respect,  this report is intended as a guide to advocates and policy makers as it seeks to   explain the technical, economic, and policy challenges surrounding energy  access in Africa.  The work is based on a six-month review of the literature on energy poverty and  energy access. This report (Part 2) on energy poverty is intended to complement  another Oxfam report exploring the challenges of closing the energy gap in Africa  and the need to minimize the use of fossil fuels in that process. That report,  referenced in this work as Part 1, can be found where this report was  downloaded.  HOW TO READ THIS REPORT  Because this report is a comprehensive account of the opportunities and  challenges for addressing energy poverty in sub-Saharan Africa, different  readers with different levels of understanding of the issues will find different parts  of the report interesting and relevant. As such, the report need not be read as a  single document, but can be read selectively according to readers’ interests.  The report is structured as follows: Section 2 of the report, intended for people  with no background in the subject matter, details the conceptual and definitional  aspects of energy poverty and energy access. The principal technical section of  the report, Section 3, describes the technical opportunities and challenges posed  by different electricity technologies including grid expansion, mini-grids, solar  home systems, and solar appliances (the role of biodigesters is discussed in Text  Box 5, located in Section 5). Section 4 reviews the empirical evidence on the  impacts of electricity on human and economic development, before Section 5  makes the case for focusing on solid biomass fuels when addressing energy  poverty. Section 6 discusses vital areas of policy focus that need to be resolved  or considered in any energy access policy. Finally, Section 7 concludes with  important areas of policy focus for advocates and policy makers.  15 Addressing energy poverty  2. ENERGY POVERTY AND  ENERGY ACCESS  The term “energy poverty” has no formally agreed definition. Usually, the term  focuses on household energy use, such as energy for cooking, lighting, and  heating. More recently, however, the notion of energy poverty has been  expanded to include both the energy needed for small-scale commercial activity  (such as energy needed to run appliances in a small business) and energy for  services (such as street lights and health clinics) (Practical Action, 2014). Work  on energy poverty usually excludes discussion of the energy provided by nutrition  and the energy needed for transportation.  Energy poverty tends to be understood in two main ways. The first is the idea of  energy poverty as the energy consumption habits of populations who are  deemed poor by other measures, such as income (Khandker et al., 2010). The  second idea is that energy poverty is itself a form of deprivation, so that energypoor  populations are those that lack access to the energy required to meet their  basic needs (Bhattacharyya, 2012; Khandker et al., 2010; Practical Action,  2014). In the latter case, the notion of energy poverty is also thought to account  for the fact that many populations must expose themselves to undue risks (such  as risks from pollution) or hardships (such as having to walk long distances and  expend significant amounts of time collecting fuelwood) in order to meet their  basic energy needs.  ENERGY POVERTY AS THE ENERGY USE OF THE  POOR  Energy poverty—when understood as the energy usage habits of poor  households—highlights the extent to which poor people spend a greater portion  of their income and time meeting their energy needs than do wealthy  households, despite the fact that wealthy households tend to consume more  energy overall (Bacon et al., 2010; Khandker et al., 2010). The reason for this is  that all people, no matter how poor, need some basic amount of energy to  survive. Among very poor households, accessing even the small amount of  energy needed for survival can mean spending a greater proportion of their  income on energy than the proportion spent by wealthy households that  consume much more energy. Poor households are also often forced to rely on  fuels and appliances that are less efficient than those available to wealthy  populations. As a result, they often have to spend more time and money to meet   their most basic energy needs. Empirical investigation has revealed that poor  households spend somewhere between 5 and 20 percent of their income on  meeting their energy needs (Africa Progress Panel, 2015; Clancy, 2006;  Khandker et al., 2010). The most commonly used measure of energy poverty is  households that spend more than 10 percent of their income on meeting their  energy needs (Khandker et al., 2010).  As high as they are, these measures of expenditure do not capture the extra time  poor households spend to meet their energy needs, nor do they account for the  fact that, in developing countries, poor households often collect their own fuels  (and therefore don’t pay for them). Thus, even these high figures may  underrepresent the extent of energy poverty in less industrialized countries.  ENERGY POVERTY AS DEPRIVATION  The second conception of energy poverty—as the experience of deprivation or  exposure to undue risks or hardships—has driven an important focus on the  notion of “energy services.” The idea here is that the availability of energy itself  (i.e., potential energy, or kinetic energy) has no direct impact on human wellbeing.  However, when that energy is able to provide services, such as heat for  cooking or light for illumination, it can have a profound effect on human wellbeing.  What matters when addressing energy poverty is providing people with  the energy services required to meet their basic needs.  Focusing on energy services makes clear that definitions of energy poverty are  both context specific and subjective (Bhattacharyya, 2012). This is because  people in different circumstances need different amounts of energy to meet their  basic needs (for example, people in cold climates need more energy to heat their  homes than do people in warm climates) and because exactly what constitutes a  need (or an undue risk) is itself fundamentally subjective (Bhattacharyya, 2012).  Although definitions of energy poverty have been hard to come by and  contentious when offered (Bhattacharyya, 2012), a prominent effort has recently  come from Practical Action, which suggests defining energy poverty as  deprivation of “the full range of energy supplies and services required to support  human social and economic development …[for]… households, enterprises and  community service providers” (Practical Action, 2014, p. 2). Beyond this,  Practical Action (2014) has provided a set of basic thresholds for energy services  against which energy poverty might be defined. These thresholds pertain to  illumination, thermal energy, cooling, refrigeration, and access to information and  communications technology. The thresholds include metrics related to both risk  and opportunity cost (Practical Action, 2014).  17 Addressing energy poverty  THE IMPACTS OF ENERGY POVERTY  Energy poverty poses a substantial challenge for development. If people lack the  ability to light their homes after sunset, activities such as studying, domestic  chores, and even small business endeavors must end when the sun goes down.  Likewise, if people are unable to warm or cool their houses, they can be left very  uncomfortable at certain times of the year, with particular risks to the very young  and very old. Further, when populations living in energy poverty do gain access  to fuels, they often risk significant harm. For example, the burning of traditional  biomass in people’s homes is estimated to cause 600,000 deaths annually in  sub-Saharan Africa alone (Africa Progress Panel, 2015). Unless current trends  change, deaths from indoor air pollution are forecast to exceed deaths from  tuberculosis and AIDS by 2030 (see Figure 2) (Africa Progress Panel, 2015).  Kerosene,1 which is used for cooking and lighting, is associated with respiratory  infection (though less so than cooking with solid fuels), and it also poses risks of  poisoning and fires (see Text Box 1).  Figure 2: Deaths caused by major infectious diseases compared with acute  lower respiratory infections, 2004, 2010, and 2030  Source: World Bank Group, 2012, in Africa Progress Panel, 2015.  1 Kerosene is also referred to as paraffin in some parts of the world.   Text Box 1: The dangers of kerosene  While the literature on energy poverty has much to say about the dangers of indoor air  pollution, it generally pays less attention to the dangers of home kerosene use, even  though an abundant literature on the subject points to the risks of both poisoning and  fire.  The exact incidence of unintentional kerosene poisoning across Africa is unknown  (Veale et al., 2013), but good data from studies in South Africa are instructive. There,  kerosene ingestion, is the most common cause of acute poisoning among South  Africa’s black population, and is estimated to result in as many as 171–996 fatalities a  year (Carolissen & Matzopoulos, 2004). Even nonfatal cases of poisoning (estimated at  46,530–93,060 a year) cause problems for families because they often result in long  and expensive hospital stays (Tshiamo, 2009). Aspiration of kerosene by children can  raise the likelihood of respiratory conditions such as tuberculosis and asthma later in  life (Tshiamo, 2009). Risks of kerosene poisoning are greatest among children in rural  areas, which are far from hospitals (Carolissen & Matzopoulos, 2004; Meyer et al.,  2007; Tshiamo, 2009).  Fire risk is also a major problem. In South Africa alone, 200,000 individuals are  estimated to be injured by, or lose property as a result of, kerosene-related fires.  Kerosene is identified as the cause of fire in 53 percent of cases (candles account for  another 30 percent of cases) (Kimemia et al., 2014).  On top of these difficulties, the time spent collecting fuelwood and cooking food  on unimproved stoves places an additional burden on energy-poor populations.  The losses in Africa due to cooking and collecting firewood are estimated at  $36.9 billion annually, if the value of unpaid labor is included. The impacts are  greatest among women and girls, who are usually responsible for these chores  (Lambe et al., 2015). Moreover, these impacts take place within a context in  which women and girls already bear a disproportionate burden of the unpaid  work within the household (Karimli et al., n.d.). Finally a lack of access to energy  compromises the efficacy of social services, such as clinics and schools, and  limits economic opportunities by constraining productivity and economic growth  (Modi et al., 2006).  19 Addressing energy poverty  Figure 3: The largest populations cooking with traditional biomass in sub-  Saharan Africa, 2012  Source IEA, 2014, reproduced from Lambe et al., 2015.  Given the challenges of energy poverty, providing energy to households in safe  and sufficient quantities is hypothesized to result in myriad positive outcomes,2  including the following:  • Improved health outcomes: Reduced burning of biomass and kerosene in  homes will reduce people’s exposure to harmful pollutants. Access to modern  fuels is expected to help prevent the cuts, falls, bites, and episodes of sexual  harassment and assault that women and girls might otherwise sustain while  collecting fuelwood. Finally, access to electricity allows for improvements to  the cold chain, which are believed to be vital for vaccination, and access to  electrified clinics is anticipated to improve health outcomes.  • Increased household income: Households that purchase modern fuels are  expected to reap savings from the use of more efficient fuels. Access to  sufficient illumination will give households more productive hours, including  increased study hours for students. Finally, access to modern fuels allows for  pumped irrigation, potentially improving farm incomes, as well as for the  diversification of income as households engage in agroprocessing and  undertake light manufacturing.  2 See Modi et al. 2006 and Practical Action 2014 for a comprehensive account of the potential  positive outcomes of providing energy services and addressing energy poverty. Much of this list  is generated from these two reports.   • Improved environmental outcomes: Reduced demand for biofuels will  lessen pressures on forests (Lewis & Pattanayak, 2012), with positive  impacts for forest services including reducing runoff and climate change  mitigation.  • Improved quality of life: Addressing households’ reliance on fuelwood will  reduce the drudgery experienced by women and girls whose job it is to collect  those fuels. Greater access to entertainment services requiring electricity will  improve people’s well-being.  • Access to ICTs and improved services: Most ICTs require electricity to  operate. The impact of television, radio, cell phones, and computers on  people’s lives will be significant. They can increase productivity, provide  people with access to crucial information, and create new industries. In terms  of services, schools, clinics, and government offices are all thought to be  made more effective by access to electricity, with important impacts for the  well-being of people who access them. Finally, improved quality of life in rural  areas is expected to help retain qualified staff (such as teachers, nurses,  bureaucrats), which will further improve access to services.  ENERGY ACCESS  Efforts to address energy poverty have focused on providing energy access. As  with energy poverty, until recently there has been little agreement on how to  define “energy access” beyond a general sentiment that it includes increasing  households’ access to sufficient quantities of energy while ensuring that they can  avoid unnecessary risk or undue drudgery (Bhattacharyya, 2012). The  vagueness of the term has not, however, diminished efforts to promote energy  access. Given the myriad potential benefits mentioned above, it has been a  mainstay of government policy in many countries.  Electricity has come to play a central role in energy access owing to its particular  ability to provide an enormous array of energy services (see Text Box 2). As a  consequence, efforts to promote energy access have often been reduced to a  narrow focus on providing access to electricity. One result has been a binary  view of energy access in which people are either “connected” or “not connected”  (Practical Action, 2014).  This narrow, binary approach belies the complexity of how people actually  consume energy. To understand why consider a household that is connected to  a source of electricity so unreliable that it has access to energy services for only  four hours a day. Or imagine a household that has access to electricity but is  unable to afford to pay for the service. Under such conditions, households may  still find themselves cooking or lighting their homes using solid fuels, with the  21 Addressing energy poverty  associated dangers, disadvantages, and drudgery. As such, simply focusing on  whether or not households are connected to electricity is a poor indicator of  whether they have access to the energy they need to avoid the deprivations,  risks, and injustices associated with energy poverty.  Text box 2: Electricity and energy services  What people require to improve their well-being is not simply energy, but energy  services. To understand this, consider the chemical energy contained in solid  biomass, or the kinetic energy in a wire carrying an electrical current: By itself, such  energy is of little value for improving a person’s well-being.  Instead, when people have access to, for example, the light generated by passing an  electric current through a filament or by burning kerosene, their productive hours are  not limited to daylight hours. Likewise, when people are able to access the heat  created by passing an electric current through an element or by burning wood or  charcoal, they can cook their food and heat their homes. Given that addressing  energy poverty is about improving well-being, energy access is about providing  people with access to energy services.  When it comes to delivering energy services, electricity has distinct advantages. First,  electricity can provide virtually all the services that a household might use. It can  provide heat, light, and telecommunications, and even run machinery. In addition,  unlike a fire, which takes time to light and burn down to embers, electricity can provide  those services almost instantly; users need only turn it on. Finally, electricity is able to  provide services while producing almost no emissions at the point of consumption,  and it is relatively safe to use.  Electricity presents other advantages as well. It is easier to transport than solid or  liquid fuels like charcoal and diesel, which must be moved along roadways. As long as  two areas are connected to one another, electricity can be provided to either one  almost instantly.  Yet using electricity to provide energy services to the poor also presents a few  disadvantages. First, households have to be connected to electricity in order to  receive it. Second, using electricity to access energy services requires owning an  appropriate appliance—an electric stove, kettle or lightbulb—which can be costly. In  contrast, a basic stove for burning wood or charcoal can be made from nothing more  than three large stones. In addition, for electricity to provide these services, the supply  of electricity must be both sufficient and reliable.  Energy access policy has frequently focused on only the first of these issues:  connecting households. This has led to an overly simplified account of energy access.  As a result, there has been a recent push to develop more comprehensive  measures of energy access that capture the multidimensional and multi-tiered   nature of the term. This has included tiered considerations of the energy’s (1)  capacity, (2) duration and availability, (3) reliability, (4) quality, (5) affordability,  (6) legality, (7) convenience, and (8) health and safety. For each category the  energy source is broken down into energy for household electricity and energy  for household cooking (World Bank Group, 2012) (see Figure 4). Despite this  more comprehensive approach, imperatives to see people rise above the most  basic level of access, and to create energy access goals against which progress  can be measured, have driven a push back toward a binary definition whereby  some tier within the energy access matrix is considered the basic threshold for  “energy access.”  Figure 4: Multi-tier matrix of energy access  Source: World Bank Group, 2014.  In summary, the field of endeavor linking energy and development has been  animated by concerns about the impacts of energy poverty and a desire to  address these by promoting energy access. Despite the longstanding focus on  both issues, neither has a clearly established definition, although recent efforts to  provide nuanced definitions that capture the complexity of these issues have  been advanced. Policy advocates in this field have found it challenging to move  the conversation beyond a simple focus on electrification as a means to address  energy poverty, and the binary definitions of energy access this focus has  created.  23 Addressing energy poverty  3. EXPANDING ACCESS TO  ELECTRICITY  Traditionally electricity has been provided to households through connections  that link households to centralized power plants. The interconnection of all of  these households into one large energy system is known as the electricity grid, or  simply “the grid.” The grid has advantages (principally around economies of  scale) and disadvantages (principally around high up-front costs) when it comes  to expanding energy access. Frustration at the disadvantages, along with  growing cognizance of the challenge of climate change and advances in  renewable energy technologies, has driven an increasing focus on providing  electricity through distributed sources. Under this model, instead of being  connected to a single centralized generating source, households are connected  to distributed sources, which are close to the point of consumption, largely  renewable, and not connected to one another through the main grid. Such  systems have the advantage of being able to reach poor and remote populations  quickly and cheaply (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016; Deshmukh et al., 2013; TERIGNESD,  2014; Terrapon-Pfaff et al., 2014), while simultaneously mitigating  carbon emissions (Alstone et al., 2015).  Text Box 3: Electricity fundamentals  Electricity is generated in power stations. The electricity from the power station is  transmitted to households or other users through a set of wires that can carry electric  current at different voltages. The linking up of many households through an  interconnected system of wires is known as the electricity grid. Any set of  interconnected households can be thought of as a grid, but some grids can be very  large, connecting entire countries, while mini-grids can be small, connecting just a few  households.  Dispatchable and Intermittent Sources  The sources of energy for producing electricity are classified into two major types:  dispatchable and intermittent. Dispatchable sources of energy can be turned on or off  whenever the person managing the plant wishes. Intermittent sources of energy are  not available all the time; their availability is determined by factors beyond the control  of the plant manager. Fossil-fuel plants provide dispatchable energy (so long as the  fuel is available), while sources such as wind and solar are intermittent, available only  when the sun is shining or the wind is blowing. Some low-carbon sources of energy  are dispatchable, such as hydroelectric power (assuming water levels are sufficient)  and nuclear power.   Alternating and Direct Current  Electricity is generated in two principal forms: alternating current (AC) and direct  current (DC). Individual appliances are built to handle one type of current only.  Electric current can be transformed from one form to another, though it is easier to  transform AC to DC than it is to transform DC to AC. The grid uses AC because large  power stations tend to produce AC (except in the case of solar PV, which produces  DC). It is more efficient to transport AC at high voltages, and it is possible to increase  or decrease the voltage of AC with relative ease via a transformer, though this step  involves losses of energy.  In general, electricity is generated at relatively low voltages. Voltages are then  “stepped up” to very high levels as electricity is transported long distances through  high-voltage power lines known as the transmission network. High voltages, however,  are dangerous in households, so voltages are “stepped down” to lower levels as  electricity is delivered to households through low-voltage power lines known as the  distribution network.  AC can be delivered through either three-phase or single-phase current (these terms  describe the timing with which alternating current alternates). Three-phase current,  which is more efficient and uses less electricity to run an appliance, is more common  in electrical grids around the world.  Matching Demand and Supply  One major downside to using electricity to provide energy services is that energy  cannot be stored as electricity. This means that the amount of electricity being  produced needs to be balanced with the amount being consumed; any excess  electricity is wasted. Given that demand varies during the day—usually with a large  peak in the early evening as users come home and start cooking, heating their  homes, and turning on their lights—such balancing is central to the management of  electricity generation.  Patterns of usage with large peaks create challenges for electricity systems. Systems  must have enough generation capacity—that is, a sufficient number of power plants—  to meet peak demand, even if this demand lasts for only a short period of the day.  This makes it difficult to finance generation capacity because power plants rely on the  sale of electricity to make money. Cases in which peak demand is much greater than  average demand cause the whole electricity system to be more expensive as capacity  sits unused for long periods of time. Consequently there are good reasons to try to  smooth out peak demand so that more of the energy generation capacity is being  used more of the time, resulting in a more efficient use of the grid’s resources.  The problem of having too little electricity when demand is high is matched by the  problem of having too much electricity when demand is low (for example, if the wind is  blowing on wind turbines in the middle of the night). In such circumstances, energy  generation capacity has to be curtailed (i.e., switched off). Curtailment makes  financing renewable projects more difficult because, as mentioned, generators make  most of their money by selling electricity, not by generating it. If they cannot sell the  electricity they generate because there is no demand, then recouping a profit on  25 Addressing energy poverty  those assets is more difficult.  Resolving Intermittency  The fact that energy cannot be stored as electricity poses additional challenges for  intermittent energy sources. When demand does not coincide with sunny or windy  conditions, users must (1) go without electricity, (2) get electricity from somewhere  where the sun is shining or the wind is blowing, or (3) have access to a dispatchable  source of electricity. This source could be a fossil fuel, a dispatchable renewable  source (such as hydropower), or stored energy that was generated when the  intermittent energy source was available (such as a battery or pumped water  storage).  All of the options for resolving intermittency raise challenges. Going without electricity  (especially if outages are unplanned) often imposes significant economic losses and  social costs. Transporting electricity across a grid involves energy losses of at least 6  percent (in Africa the losses can be even higher, between 15 and 30 percent) and  requires the presence of expensive grid infrastructure. Furthermore, using the grid as  a form of backup is only effective when the grid is large enough to have significant  diversity in demand and generation. Small grids are vulnerable to fluctuations in both  demand and generation and therefore have greater needs for storage and/or backup  in order to deal with intermittency.  The use of fossil fuels as a backup causes climate change and has other social costs  (such as the health costs associated with pollution from burning fossil fuels). The  variability of fossil-fuel prices also means that electricity prices can fluctuate, creating  shocks for the users. Finally, in remote areas, access to fossil fuels can be unreliable.  In such cases fossil-fuel generation sources are not viable as a backup to intermittent  sources.  Finally, storage is expensive. Batteries are a promising option, but in addition to being  expensive, they must be carefully maintained to ensure their longevity. Although lead-acid  batteries are a proven technology and are relatively cheap, even when carefully  managed their life expectancy is much less than that of other renewable components,  such as solar panels. In addition, effective management means limiting how deeply  one discharges the batteries. For lead-acid batteries, limiting battery discharge to 20  percent provides for the longest battery life, but limiting discharge to that extent  means that more batteries are needed to achieve the same amount of overall storage  capacity in a system. Lithium-ion batteries allow for greater depth of discharge  (around 80 percent) and more charge cycles, and thus a longer life, but they have  much higher costs than lead-acid batteries (IRENA, 2016b). In general, batteries of  any type should not be fully discharged, or discharged too quickly. Doing so  decreases their life span, which—given the cost of batteries—can substantially  increase the cost of the overall electricity system.  Another solution to the storage challenge is pumped storage, in which water is  pumped up a hill and then stored before it runs down over a generator. In order for  pumped storage to be cost-effective, an area must be proximate to high ground on  which reservoirs can be built.   Such a broad overview of electricity generation technologies ignores, however,  the detailed technical and economic complexities of generating and distributing  electricity. A lack of understanding about these technical challenges, and  therefore about the associated institutional challenges, has resulted in polarized  and simplistic discussions about the capacity for different approaches to provide  electricity and address energy poverty. This section of the report focuses on four  potential electricity generation and distribution technologies, looking at the  specific advantages, opportunities, and challenges associated with each. The  report considers four dominant approaches: (1) connecting households by  expanding the grid, (2) providing electricity via mini-grids, (3) providing electricity  via solar home systems (SHSs), and (4) providing energy services via the sale of  solar appliances. Once the case has been made for ensuring that households  have energy for thermal needs such as cooking and heating, the report also  discusses the potential for biodigesters to address energy poverty (Text Box 5).  EXPANDING THE GRID  All countries that have significantly increased their electrification rates in recent  years have done so by expanding the grid to connect unelectrified households  (e.g., China, Vietnam, Philippines, and South Africa) (Bhattacharyya, 2012;  Dinkelman, 2011; Khandker et al., 2009b; Modi et al., 2006). Compared with  other technologies, the grid is uniquely able to take advantage of economies of  Terminology  Finally some energy terminology: Energy is measured in joules (j), while power is  measured in watts (W). Power is the rate at which energy is converted from one form  to another and is measured in joules per second (W = jt; where “t” = time in  seconds). Electric power stations convert energy from one source (a fuel) into  electricity at a given rate; as a result their capacity (or power) is expressed in watts  based on the rate at which they produce electricity. Quantities of electricity are  measured in watt-hours. One watt-hour is the amount of energy used when a one-watt  appliance is run for one hour (note that watt-hours can also be expressed in  joules, as both are quantities of energy, but a joule is such a small unit of  measurement that using it is unwieldy). The most common measures of electrical  energy are kilowatt- and megawatt-hours (kWh or mWh), and thus energy prices are  usually set in terms of the price per kWh ($/kWh).  The cost of different electrical generation systems is most effectively expressed as  the levelized cost of electricity (LCOE). The LCOE is determined by dividing the total  cost of a generating system (including any necessary fuel, replacement parts,  maintenance and decommissioning costs) and dividing it by the total amount of  energy the system will generate over its lifetime. LCOE is measured in $/kWh or  $/mWh.  27 Addressing energy poverty  scale by connecting many people to a single piece of infrastructure (ARE, n.d.).  Because the cost of expanding the grid is shared by all of the connected  customers, the grid provides electricity at the lowest retail price of all the  technologies (see Text Box 4). The grid can also provide electricity in very large  quantities and at very high voltages, which some industrial users require. Finally,  because the grid is the dominant way that households receive electricity around  the world, it has the advantage of being a well-understood technology with  blueprints for how to finance and build the necessary infrastructure, as well as  how to sell electricity. The institutional requirements and challenges involved in  operating and managing such a large piece of infrastructure are also well known.  Challenges to expanding the grid  Grid expansion also involves a number of challenges. Foremost among these are  the high up-front costs of extending the grid and the high cost of connecting  individual households (ARE, n.d.; Hogarth & Granoff, 2015). The World Bank–  administered Energy Sector Management Assistance Program estimated the  cost of expanding the grid at $8,000–$10,000 per kilometer in 2000.3 The  majority of these costs ($7,000) were for equipment, with poles and then  conductors being the most expensive components (ESMAP, 2000). Such high  costs and the fact that it takes advantage of economies of scale mean that the  grid is well suited to serving densely populated areas in which people can afford  to connect to the grid and pay for electricity in fairly large quantities. It also  means, however, that the grid is poorly suited to supplying electricity to sparsely  populated, poor, and remote areas, where only small amounts of electricity will  be consumed. This is especially the case if these populations reside in  challenging terrain where the necessary infrastructure is difficult to build and  maintain (ARE, n.d.). Notably, much of sub-Saharan Africa’s rural population has  these challenging characteristics: low density, low incomes, and low levels of  demand. In addition, the current extent of the grid is extremely limited in much of  sub-Saharan Africa, so expansion plans would need to be ambitious.  Moreover, simply connecting households to the grid will improve their access to  energy only insofar as the gird infrastructure is reliable and the generating  capacity on the grid is sufficient to meet demand. In sub-Saharan Africa, most  countries are currently experiencing a generation shortfall (see Part 1 of this  series). Expanding people’s access to an unreliable grid, without addressing  capacity problems, is only likely to place greater demands on the system and  make the grid less reliable for everyone who is already connected  (Bhattacharyya, 2012; Murphy et al., 2014). Finally, because of the centralized  nature of the grid, the overall infrastructure is vulnerable to localized impacts so  that damage to one part of the grid (caused, for example, by severe weather or  3 It was estimated that this figure could be brought down to about $5,000 over normal terrain in  developing countries.   the breakdown of a single large generator) can proliferate and bring down the  entire system.  In addition, because the grid approximates a perfect monopoly (with high capital  costs and low marginal costs), it is not amenable to private competition and is  therefore best managed by a regulated utility. In contexts where regulation is  weak, as it is in much of sub-Saharan Africa, utilities have tended to  underperform (see the section on Tariffs below) and have even become major  sites of patronage (Africa Progress Panel, 2015). In the context of an  unresponsive utility, electrification through grid expansion is highly unlikely,  especially into areas that are politically and economically marginal (ARE, n.d.).  Historically the grid has been powered by fossil fuels, which has significant  implications for climate change, but this does not need to be the case. It is  technically feasible for the grid to integrate large quantities of renewables (see  Part 1 of this series). In this respect the grid actually presents an important  advantage for renewable energy because its geographic extent allows for the  integration of a greater diversity of supply and consumption (see Text Box 3).  Grid: Solutions  Efforts to address the challenges involved in rolling out the grid have focused on  bringing down the costs of connecting to the grid by using cheaper materials  (e.g., bamboo) in transmission and distribution networks (see Text Box 3) and  through the use of “ready boards” to reduce the cost of household wiring  (Mostert, 2008). Other options for reducing connection costs include bulk  purchasing of the materials needed for the distribution network (Modi et al.,  2006).  Countries have also sought to innovate to get around the problems of corrupt or  dysfunctional energy utilities. Their efforts have principally involved reforming the  utility, largely through commercialization and the introduction of competition. The  hope is that such reforms will “improve the technical, commercial, and financial  performance of utilities; boost sector cash flow; facilitate mobilization of  resources for capital investment on a commercial basis, thereby releasing public  funds for other investments; and extend access to electricity to poor and rural  communities” (World Bank, 2005, p. 1).  The impact of these reforms on poor people has been difficult to assess. Many  countries have seen rates of access to electricity increase in the wake of reform,  but these advances are thought to have been driven more by government  policies, programs, and subsidies that have sought to connect households and  reduce tariffs than they have by the reform efforts themselves (World Bank,  2005). Critics of utility reform argue that it has limited impacts on access because  private sector participation tends to result in tariff increases as the private utility  seeks to improve its financial standing. In addition, introducing a profit motive to  29 Addressing energy poverty  the utility causes it to focus on providing electricity to communities that are  already connected and proven to be profitable or that can be connected at a low  cost. Such a focus comes at the expense of efforts to expand access to currently  poor and unconnected areas (Mostert, 2008; Scott et al., 2003). On the other  hand, proponents of reform point out that no African country has completely  unbundled its utility, and thus impacts on price and access have not been fully  realized (Eberhard et al., 2008; World Bank, 2005).  In addition to reform, innovations related to utilities have focused on improving  and simplifying bill collection by installing prepaid metering or by imposing flat  tariffs and installing load limiters (which limit how much energy any household  can use) instead of meters (Mostert, 2008). In other cases countries have sought  to outsource functions in which the utility does not have a natural comparative  advantage, such as meter reading and bill collection (Mostert, 2008). In some  cases countries have even outsourced the retailing of electricity, creating a  system in which wholesalers purchase electricity from the grid and then sell it to  customers directly4 (Scott et al., 2003). This model has helped improve access in  Phnom Penh, but regulation of the wholesalers has proved difficult, so much so  that some households were being charged up to three times the standard tariff.  As a result there have been calls to abandon the program (Scott et al., 2003).  Because of the cost of expanding the grid to Africa’s sparse and remote  population and the unresponsiveness of many African utilities, there has been a  recent push to focus on distributed generation technologies. Proponents of  distributed technologies hope that the private sector will be heavily involved,  circumventing the need to engage an unresponsive utility.  4 In many African cities, households that are connected to the grid sell power to their neighbors  (usually in informal dwellings) through unregulated connections via an extension cord (Mostert,  2008).    MINI-GRIDS  Mini-grids refer to a variety of electricity generation systems drawing on a variety  of sources, including solar photovoltaic (PV), wind, small-scale hydropower, and  fossil fuels (usually in the form of a diesel generator), or some combination of  these. Mini-grids connect a number of households and/or services to a  generation point. They can provide power at a variety of scales, ranging from  very small amounts for limited hours of the day to large amounts comparable to  those consumed by grid users available 24 hours a day (ARE, n.d.). They can be  stand-alone systems connecting households that are remote from the grid, or  31 Addressing energy poverty  they can be connected to the grid and used to smooth out problems with grid  supply.5 Power from mini-grids can be made available in either AC or DC, and as  either single-phase (known as nano/pico-grids) or three-phase power (known as  mini-grids) (IRENA, 2016b) (see Text Box 3).  Because mini-grids and nano-grids (hereafter simply referred to as mini-grids)  can generate large quantities of electricity, they have the potential to provide  “motive power” (power to run motors and machines) that could supply small  businesses and promote economic development (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016;  Deshmukh et al., 2013; TERI-GNESD, 2014). In addition, mini-grid systems are  modular, meaning that they can be broken down into individual modules in the  form of solar panels and batteries (M. Lee et al., 2014). Consequently, systems  can initially be built with only limited generation capacity and then add capacity  as demand for electricity increases.  The cost of electricity from mini-grids varies by the generation source available  as well as the demands on the system (M. Lee et al., 2014). Micro-hydropower is  the cheapest energy source (assuming the river runs all year), but such systems  are limited to areas with appropriate geography (ARE, n.d.). Wind, although  cheap, is also highly site-specific, and careful assessment of local wind  availability is essential before making investments in wind-driven mini-grids  (ARE, n.d.). Solar PV is ubiquitously available and relatively predictable; as a  result it has been thought to offer the greatest promise for promoting energy  access via mini-grids. Given the focus on PV in Africa, the remainder of this  section will consider PV-based mini-grids.  Challenges for mini-grids  Although the initial capital requirements for mini-grids are significantly lower than  the initial capital requirements for extending the grid (Alstone et al., 2015;  Deshmukh et al., 2013; Hogarth & Granoff, 2015), the up-front costs for minigrids  are still large compared with the capital available to local entrepreneurs in  many developing countries (Bhattacharyya, 2015). The small size of mini-grids  means that they require storage, in the form of batteries, and experience few  economies of scale (see Text Box 3). The need for storage increases the overall  system cost, both because batteries themselves can be costly and because  adding batteries requires building excess generation capacity as batteries place  an extra strain on the system (Murphy et al., 2014). Owing to the diseconomies  of scale, the costs of increasing the capacity of a mini-grid must be passed on to  consumers, making the electricity from mini-grids expensive compared with that  from the grid and relative to the incomes of the populations they are intended to  serve (see Text Box 4). Finally, when mini-grids are placed in remote or hard-to-  5 Using mini-grids (which include generation capacity and storage) to smooth supply problems from  the grid has been shown to be cheaper than trying to smooth supply using batteries alone  (Murphy et al., 2014).   reach locations, maintenance costs can be high, further increasing the cost of the  overall system (Africa Progress Panel, 2015; TERI-GNESD, 2014).  Text Box 4: The cost of electricity  It is impossible to provide an accurate estimate of the average LCOE for electricity  from mini-grids, for several reasons. The costs of components and labor vary across  countries, and the cost of energy from a mini-grid depends on the size of the system,  the source of the energy, and the pattern of demand placed on the system (see Text  Box 3). Research from Bangladesh (Bhattacharyya, 2015), however, which looks at  the price of energy based on different mini-grid configurations, can provide us with a  useful sense of what costs might look like.  The research modeled four types of systems, each of increasing capacity. They  ranged from a basic system that covered immediate needs (such as household  lighting, a fan, and a television, available for limited periods of the day) up to a  system that could handle relatively large household loads, as well as productive and  commercial loads, and that was available 24 hours a day.  The study used the HOMER model and considered PV-diesel hybrid mini-grids,  using component costs thought to reflect the market price for these goods in  Bangladesh. It found that for the low-capacity system, a diesel-only approach was  cheapest (assuming a diesel price of $0.6/liter, or $2.27/gallon). For this system, the  LCOE was $0.47/kWh. For larger systems, hybrid arrangements were cheapest,  resulting in a LCOE of $0.34–$0.37/kWh, with costs decreasing as the capacity of  the system went up. These numbers are comparable to theoretical resource  assessments of mini-grids in Africa (using component and labor costs from  Germany), which put the LCOE of PV mini-grids at $0.24–$0.35/kWh (€/0.18–  €/0.25kWh, in 2014) (Huld et al., 2014).  We can compare these costs with the cost of electricity from other sources (see  table below). SHSs in Bangladesh have an LCOE of about $0.72/kWh and provide  services equivalent to those of the lowest-capacity mini-grid used in the above study  (Bhattacharyya, 2012). Diesel-only mini-grids are thus a cheaper way to generate  electricity than SHSs, assuming households are suitably clustered together. On the  other hand, grid tariffs in Bangladesh are only $0.04/kWh for consumption up to  100kWh a month. When comparing these prices, we should keep in mind that in  Bangladesh these prices are based on PV-hybrid systems (with the diesel generator  contributing substantially to generation) and that purely PV systems would be more  expensive.  In Africa, where grid tariffs are so high that they are widely considered an  impediment to development, retail prices from the grid are about $0.13/kWh (World  Bank, 2013)—though they can be much higher in some cases. To get a sense of  what these numbers mean, consider that the International Energy Agency definition  of energy access suggests that an urban household needs at least 500 kWh of  electricity annually to meet its basic energy requirements for lighting,  33 Addressing energy poverty  The fact that the cost of electricity from mini-grids is generally higher than that  provided by the grid (Deshmukh et al., 2013) (see Text Box 4) creates challenges  for using mini-grids to drive increases in energy access and in human  development. First, the high cost limits the extent to which mini-grids are  accessible to the poor (TERI-GNESD, 2014; World Bank, 2008). Second, even  among populations who do get access to the electricity, high costs mean that  households tend to limit the services they are willing to access to those requiring  only small amounts of electricity (such as lighting and cell-phone charging) and  6 This average increased only $20 over the preceding 15 years and thus is unlikely to have  changed dramatically since 2008.  7 Note that the Bangladesh retail price is $0.04/kWh for consumption up to 100 kWh/month. A  consumer who uses more than 1,200 kWh/year would pay more than the $0.04/kWh tariff. Thus  this is a theoretical value.  communications, and some cooling, while a rural household needs at least 250 kWh  (IEA, n.d.). Based on the 2008 average income for an African household of $7626  (Lakner & Milanovic, 2013), 10 percent of that household budget (the income  threshold for energy poverty) would provide $76.20 for spending on energy. At minigrid  prices ($0.34/kWh), the average African household could afford only 224 kWh a  year. At average African grid prices ($0.13/kWh), the average household could  afford about 586 kWh annually.  All of this together means that the average African household could not afford to  purchase the basic electricity required for a rural household even if it spent as much  as 10 percent of its annual budget on electricity obtained from a relatively largecapacity  mini-grid. Such a household could only just meet the needs of an urban  household when buying electricity from the grid. When we consider that this 10  percent budget share excludes energy for cooking, it becomes clear just how large a  challenge energy costs present for improving energy access among poor, rural  households.  do not use electricity for productive purposes (Bhattacharyya, 2015). The high  cost of electricity from mini-grids therefore poses a significant challenge to the  profitability of mini-grids, which in turn limits interest from the private sector.  Problems of profitability are compounded by the risk of grid encroachment, which  occurs when the grid is expanded to communities currently receiving electricity  from a mini-grid. Given the cheaper price of electricity from the grid, consumers  are liable to abandon the mini-grid, and the investor who owns the infrastructure  stands to lose money on the project.  Finally, as will become clear below, it should be remembered that operating a  mini-grid is essentially like operating a mini-utility and therefore requires  considerable economic, financial, and technical skill (Bhattacharyya & Palit,  2016). A lack of trained installers, technicians, and trainers therefore presents a  hurdle to their effective deployment in sub-Saharan Africa. Mini-grids also suffer  from the fact that they are a new technology and as such present a “risky  business environment due to unknown consumer characteristics and unfamiliar  business activities, weak institutional arrangements… [that arise]… from nonsupportive  regulatory and policy frameworks, limited access to low cost finance  and inadequacies in local skills and capacities” (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016, p.  167).  Mini-grid: Solutions  Because the principal barrier to mini-grids is the high tariffs that stem from the  high cost of capital (TERI-GNESD, 2014), reviews of experiences with mini-grids  have focused on how to keep the capital costs down. A number of potential  solutions exist, but they all come with their own challenges. Before talking about  such challenges, however, it should be noted that mini-grids stand to benefit  greatly from the advances in renewable technology, which will lower the cost of  both PV generation and storage (see Figure 5). Likewise, the arrival of new low-watt  appliances will mean that households can experience improved services  despite the high price of electricity from mini-grids. Considering opportunities for  mini-grids to address energy poverty therefore requires a serious consideration  of future prices for solar and storage technologies, which should be justified and  made explicit in any energy access policy.  35 Addressing energy poverty  Figure 5: The falling price of solar panels: March 2010–October 2016  Source: PVXchange, n.d.  Beyond technical advances, however, the most obvious solution to the problem  of high up-front costs is to cut corners on the size of the system by reducing its  capacity and storage or to purchase cheaper, low-quality system components.  However, reviews of experiments with mini-grids warn strongly against both  options, as both are likely to result in more rapid system failure and consumer  dissatisfaction. In the long run these outcomes will lead to higher costs and raise  the risk that the project will be abandoned altogether (M. Lee et al., 2014).  Instead, it is thought that investing in the longevity of the equipment and  minimizing replacement costs is the best way to keep costs down over the long  term (ARE, n.d.).  Without cutting corners in terms of size or quality, another way to hold down the  costs of a mini-grid system is to keep the system as small as possible while still  meeting people’s energy needs. Achieving this requires exhaustive analysis of  likely system demand prior to embarking on any project (ARE, n.d.; Deshmukh et  al., 2013). While this is certainly good advice, as well as a means to ensure that  demand-side management is built into any mini-grid system (Deshmukh et al.,  2013), it can be highly resource intensive. Unelectrified rural households rarely  know how much electricity they will use once they are connected. As a result,  demand analysis usually involves extensive assessments of household energy  use patterns. Mini-grid costs can potentially be lowered further by asking  households to sacrifice some reliability in return for lower tariffs (M. Lee et al.,  2014). Such a strategy, however, requires knowing not only exactly what demand  is likely to look like, but also how consumers will react to changes in reliability    and what an acceptable level of reliability would be.8 Understanding such  dynamics requires an even more detailed assessment of how users will consume  energy services—down to the hourly level—which is, again, very resource  intensive (M. Lee et al., 2014).  Another means of reducing the cost of electricity from mini-grids is to integrate  domestic and productive uses, limiting the latter to off-peak periods. Doing so will  distribute peak demand more evenly, allowing for more effective use of  generation capacity, which in turn, improves, cost recovery, and therefore allows  for lower overall tariffs (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016) (see Text Box 3). An  effective way to achieve this is to identify “anchor tenants”—relatively large  reliable consumers such as a cell tower or a mill—that can guarantee the  consumption of a basic amount of electricity during off-peak hours (ARE, n.d.;  Deshmukh et al., 2013; Modi et al., 2006; Palit & Sarangi, 2014). Residential and  small business users can then be added to the system, and the system can be  scaled up as demand increases. The use of an anchor tenant can also help  address the financing challenge, because private investors have the security of  selling a basic load of electricity to that tenant. Still, it can be challenging to  integrate productive and domestic loads as the former do not always easily arise  from electrification; the reasons for this are discussed in greater detail below.  Another means of reducing capital costs is to focus on hybrid systems in which  PV generation is augmented by a diesel genset —an electric generator powered  by a diesel engine (ARE, n.d.; Bhattacharyya, 2015; Murphy et al., 2014). The  genset can provide power to the system in cases of prolonged cloudiness and  also maintain the battery discharge at a minimum level, thereby increasing its  longevity (see Text Box 3). The system’s generation capacity does not have to  be oversized to the same extent, and battery packs can be smaller—two  advantages that save on up-front costs (Bhattacharyya, 2015). The integration of  PV and battery modules into existing diesel mini-grids can also effectively reduce  energy costs by cutting diesel consumption (Bhattacharyya, 2015; IRENA,  2016b; Murphy et al., 2014). The cost savings made possible by switching from  PV-only or diesel-only generation to hybrid systems get larger as the size of the  system increases (Bhattacharyya, 2015), and there is thought to be considerable  scope for such gains across sub-Saharan Africa given the scale of generator use  (see Figure 6) (IRENA, 2016b). Obviously, the possibilities for cost-savings  based on hybridization depend on the prices of diesel and PV components, but  for most prices in the near future, hybrid diesel-PV systems will provide the  lowest-cost electricity (Murphy et al., 2014) (see Figure 7).  8 If households use electricity for irrigation, for example, the loss of electricity for 12 hours three  times a year would not be a problem. If, however, electricity is used to provide refrigeration for  food stocks or vaccines, then outages of more than three hours become problematic.  37 Addressing energy poverty  Figure 6: The distribution of existing oil/diesel generator capacity in sub-  Saharan Africa    Yet hybrid diesel-PV systems also pose challenges. The introduction of diesel  results in carbon emissions9 and can cause electricity prices to become unstable  owing to fluctuations in the price of fuel.10 Diesel gensets also require  maintenance which has proven challenging in some contexts, and on top of this,  there are instances in which diesel supply chains are weak, rendering the PVhybrid  mini-grids vulnerable in cases where diesel cannot be procured (M. Lee et  al., 2014; Murphy et al., 2014). Given these challenges, expert advice has begun  to suggest eschewing hybrid systems in favor of purely PV generation, despite  the increased costs (M. Lee et al., 2014; Murphy et al., 2014).  9 In these systems PV generally ends up providing between 75 and 90 percent of the power (ARE,  n.d.), so carbon emissions and diesel price impacts are relatively small.  10 See footnote 4.   Figure 7: Price points at which PV-only, hybrid, and diesel-only mini-grids  produce the lowest-cost electricity  Source: Murphy et al., 2014, p. 533.  Proper battery management is essential to the longevity of mini-grids. While  management can be automated (ARE, n.d.), having skilled technicians to  manage the mini-grid can reduce overall system costs. Technicians can make  appropriate decisions about balancing battery life with system reliability in cases  of reduced generation or in times of heavy load (M. Lee et al., 2014). Sub-  Saharan Africa, however, currently lacks skilled technicians (Bhattacharyya,  2012). In addition, introducing discretion on the part of technician can open the  door for battery mismanagement (see Text Box 3), which can end up increasing  overall energy costs and threaten the sustainability of the system (ARE, n.d.).  Such problems have been observed in Bangladesh, where batteries have been  observed to last as little as 4–5 years (TERI-GNESD, 2014) when their expected  life should be closer to 10 years (Bhattacharyya, 2015).  In principle it would be possible to lower the cost of electricity from mini-grids by  using grid-connected consumers to subsidize the expansion of distributed  electricity infrastructure just as one would subsidize grid expansion (dividing the  cost of any expansion by all the existing grid-connected customers) (Deshmukh  et al., 2013). This analogy does not hold perfectly in the case of mini-grids,  however. All grid users benefit from a more diverse pool of consumers (so long  as there is sufficient generation capacity), but connecting households to an  isolated mini-grid does not diversify the national grid. Subsidies could still be  justified on social justice grounds, but in practice such an approach raises  questions about whether existing consumers should subsidize private purveyors  of mini-grids or only state-owned mini-grids that will eventually be incorporated  39 Addressing energy poverty  into the grid. The complexities of such an arrangement appear to have prevented  it from being implemented anywhere (Deshmukh et al., 2013; TERI-GNESD,  2014).  The final means for keeping tariffs down is to ensure that the equipment used in  the mini-grid is used for the full extent of its lifespan. Given that the longest-lasting  components in a mini-grid can last for 25 years, ensuring that mini-grids  operate for the full 25 years is an effective means for keeping tariffs as low as  possible because no component value is wasted (ARE, n.d.). This solution,  however, compounds problems of grid encroachment, which dissuades private  investment in distributed energy systems with long payback periods.  Challenges related to grid encroachment can however be mitigated. Mini-grids  can be designed to be incorporated into the grid when it arrives. Under such a  scenario, generation capacity as well as distribution infrastructure could be  bought by the utility and then integrated into the overall grid (ARE, n.d.;  Deshmukh et al., 2013). Similarly, the utility could purchase electricity from the  owner of the mini-grid at a set price until the costs of the system have been fully  recovered. In both cases, however, the utility will likely be subsidizing the private  seller, who will be forced to sell electricity at a higher price than that available  from the grid. In addition, designing mini-grids so they can be incorporated into  the grid imposes higher up-front costs during construction. These mainly involve  ensuring that the system can deliver three-phase power (ARE, n.d.) (see Text  Box 3) by adding inverters (which require maintenance and are expensive to  replace) to PV systems in order to convert the DC produced by solar panels to  AC. Another potential solution to grid encroachment is to keep mini-grid systems  separated from the grid after it arrives (a process known as “islanding”). Such an  approach can be used to ensure cost recovery on investments in mini-grids  (Deshmukh et al., 2013), but it can also create political challenges if populations  that could connect to the grid are stuck paying higher tariffs for a potentially  inferior service, as they could be on the mini-grid.  Addressing issues of (1) financing, (2) lack of technical staff to support mini-grid  operation and maintenance, and (3) challenges associated with first-generation  technologies will likely require heavy support from donors and the state. Such  support would include the development of tools for financing local entrepreneurs  in this space; training for the array of personnel involved in mini-grid siting,  installation, operation, and maintenance; and support for data sharing and  learning around the creation of effective business models (Alstone et al., 2015;  ARE, n.d.; Deshmukh et al., 2013).  While there is certainly scope for the private sector to deliver mini-grids, the idea  that the private sector will simply fill the vacuum left by the failure of the state and  exploit the untapped market among unelectrified households in sub-Saharan  Africa appears naïve. In this respect all assessments of mini-grid success and   failure point to the need for a strong regulatory and policy environment in order  for the private sector to operate effectively (Alstone et al., 2015; ARE, n.d.;  Deshmukh et al., 2013; IRENA, 2016a; Palit & Sarangi, 2014; TERI-GNESD,  2014). While there are no silver-bullet solutions to the policy and regulatory  challenges surrounding mini-grids, a number of generic actions to be taken have  been identified. The state should (1) ensure that subsidies are available to make  mini-grids economically viable (see below), (2) develop a regulatory environment  that lays out the rules of the game for different actors, (3) take the lead in at least  providing resource surveys, (4) make public all plans for grid expansion, (5)  ensure the safety and reliability of the mini-grid and make allowances for  islanding or integration of the mini-grid when the national grid arrives, and (6)  provide training in design, siting, operation, and maintenance of mini-grids  (Deshmukh et al., 2013).  The state or utility can also play an important function in bundling mini-grid  projects together so that they start to make financial sense for the private sector  (ARE, n.d.). This is often achieved on the basis of geographic concessions,  offered via tenders, in which companies take responsibility for supplying mini-grid  systems to all the potential users in a geographic area (Mostert, 2008).  It should be noted, however, that even under supportive conditions the private  sector has been known to refuse to deliver mini-grids to certain areas if they are  considered too remote, too poor, or too small to offer serious potential for growth  in demand (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016). In this respect, even though distributed  energy technologies are intended to improve energy access among the poor,  reviews show that they continue to benefit the relatively well-off (Bhattacharyya &  Palit, 2016; World Bank, 2008). Community-managed mini-grids could help  address this challenge, but any community-driven development effort takes a  great deal of time and resources and therefore does not scale quickly or easily  (ARE, n.d.).  Overall, mini-grids provide a potentially valuable way to deliver electricity to areas  for which grid access will be a challenge. Even though the up-front costs are less  than those for grid extension, they still pose significant challenges for financing  projects and result in high costs of electricity. There are ways to get around these  challenges, but they all involve creating bespoke energy systems in which  demand patterns are analyzed exhaustively and systems are built to purpose.  The extent to which such systems are context specific and reliant on new  technology poses major challenges to their scalability and creates a significant  technical burden. At the moment mini-grids in Africa are focused on pilot efforts,  and to be a source of mass electrification they will need to be scaled up  significantly and quickly. Studies examining the challenges to scaling up  distributed energy systems in South Asia have identified problems similar to  those that dominate the sub-Saharan African context: small markets, lack of  financing, uncertain policy environments, and a lack of business models for  41 Addressing energy poverty  managing and maintaining a huge amount of distributed infrastructure  (Bhattacharyya, 2014).  SOLAR HOME SYSTEMS (SHSs)  Smaller than mini-grids, solar home systems are generation systems designed to  provide electricity to a single household using solar panels and a small battery.  While SHSs can be large, including many solar panels and a large battery, for  the purpose of increasing energy access among low-income groups such  systems usually include only a couple of panels and a small battery, providing  very limited amounts of power. The major advantage of SHSs is that they can be  used to provide electricity to isolated households (in contrast to the mini-grid,  which requires that households be clustered together so they can all be  connected to the generating source via a low-voltage distribution line11). Because  utilities traditionally lack expertise in retail, they often leave the provision of such  systems to the private sector, through either direct sales or concessions (Mostert,  2008).  Challenges with SHSs  The downside of SHSs is that due to the small size of these systems they can  only provide small amounts of electricity (suitable for lighting, entertainment,  charging a cell phone, and cooling) that are available for only a limited number of  hours a day. These systems are unable to supply energy for heating or cooking  and are not sufficient to provide motive power to support small industry. As such,  the technology provides only the lowest tiers of energy access. Like mini-grids,  SHSs stand to gain from likely future advances that reduce the cost of renewable  generation and storage components and from the arrival of new low-watt  appliances on the market.  Theft of solar panels can be a problem. Where this is the case households have  been known to surround panels with locked steel cages or remove panels from  their roofs so they can better watch them, and then lock them indoors while  households are unattended. In all instances changing the installation of the solar  panels decreases their generation capacity,12 compromising the capacity of the  system even further (Azimoh et al., 2014).  11 SHSs have sometimes been set up in nano-grids to allow for better sharing of batteries and  capacity.  12 Solar panels are usually placed on unshaded roofs facing the equator at an angle that maximizes  their exposure to incoming solar radiation (“insolation”). Moving panels so that they no longer  face the equator or stand without and angle or covering them (e.g., with cages) all serve to  reduce the insolation they receive and therefore reduce system capacity.   The low capacity of the SHSs not only limits potential development impacts, but  can also cause problems for sustainability. As a household slowly purchases  appliances, it increases the load on the system (Gustavsson, 2007; K. Lee et al.,  2016). If a household overloads the system, placing extra strain on the battery, it  shortens battery life and increases the cost of the overall system (see Text Box  3) (Ellegård et al., 2004).  SHSs also raise regulatory challenges. In South Africa, for example, some local  technicians have been involved in a black-market service in which they offer to  bypass load control units on batteries (see below under “SHS: Solutions”).  Likewise, battery mismanagement, and the associated costs, has put subsidies  under pressure. Eventually this has resulted in nonpayment to the companies  responsible for the concessions, causing them to drop out of the program  (Azimoh et al., 2014). In Bangladesh there have been reports of problems  caused by the use of low-quality components, poor installation practices, and  inadequate control mechanisms, all of which compromise long-term sustainability  (Bhattacharyya, 2015).  Finally, SHSs are truly unable to take advantage of economies of scale. While  they are the cheapest way to deliver electricity to isolated and remote  households, the electricity from an SHS is usually more expensive than that  provided by a mini-grid that provides the same level of services (Bhattacharyya,  2015) (see Text Box 4). In addition, even with relatively low capital costs, many  poor households remain unable to afford the up-front costs of SHS installation.  SHS: Solutions  As with the mini-grid, problems related to the affordability of both the system and  the electricity it produces can be addressed by providing subsidies (as in South  Africa13) (Azimoh et al., 2015) or creating accessible credit schemes (such as the  Grameen Shakti program in Bangladesh).  To help improve battery management and prevent excessive discharging, load  control systems can be added to the system. It should be noted, however, that  there are documented cases of such systems’ being circumvented and batteries’  being discharged anyway (Azimoh et al., 2014). Risk of theft can be reduced by  using mobile racks that hold the solar panels off the ground and at an appropriate  angle,14 yet allow households to move them inside when the dwelling is  unattended (Azimoh et al., 2014).  It is thought that many of the challenges with SHSs can be addressed if the  communities receiving the technology are suitably well engaged so that they  understand the capacity of the system and the challenges to sustainability posed  by system mismanagement. Yet it can be difficult to manage people’s  expectations when they have a desire for higher-capacity systems (Benjamin,  2015; Lee et al., 2016), especially when the populations being served by SHSs  are interacting with consumers who are served by mini-grids or the national grid,  who pay less for their electricity, and who receive a higher-quality service  (Azimoh et al., 2014; Mostert, 2008). As with mini-grids, households sometimes  abandon SHSs when the grid arrives in their area (Khandker et al., 2009b).  Finally, as with mini-grids, the rollout of SHSs will require an active role for the  state or utility, which will, at least, have to create the appropriate conditions for  the delivery of such services. These conditions will include an appropriate  regulatory environment that ensures the quality of the systems being installed  and engages project recipients in understanding the need to manage the service  appropriately and the challenges related to system capacity. As with mini-grids,  bundling households into concessions is an effective tool for making their  installation profitable to the private sector. Finally, issues of grid encroachment  will remain a challenge. The utility must not only make transparent statements  about grid expansion plans (and remain true to these), but also have a policy in  place for managing how distributed technologies will interact with the grid when it  arrives.  Overall SHSs provide an important means for providing access to electricity, but  the general success or failure of a program depends on the specific context. In  many cases households have been satisfied with the service they receive from  SHSs despite the costs (Ellegård et al., 2004). In general satisfaction results of  the fact that using liquid fuels for illumination (candles or kerosene) is so  inefficient (Mills, 2003) that SHS can still prove a cheaper way for households to  meet their illumination needs. Furthermore, because illumination from an electric  bulb is preferred to illumination from a candle and solid fuels cannot provide  cooling, entertainment, or ICT services. As a result households have even been  willing to pay more for electricity from SHSs than they would normally spend on  kerosene and candles (Ellegård et al., 2004). In other cases, however, the limited  capacity of SHSs has resulted in high levels of dissatisfaction, especially if  recipients live near consumers who receive electricity from the grid (Azimoh et  al., 2015; Schillebeeck et al., 2012). Studies have shown that people can have a  sense of isolation or discrimination when they receive inferior electricity services  as a result of their access being limited to distributed technologies  (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016). In some cases households have resisted being  connected via SHSs in order to avoid being marked as “connected” and  undermining their chances of gaining access to the grid at a later date (Ellegård  et al., 2004). Provision of SHSs should thus not be viewed as a substitute for grid  connections; rather, SHS technology must be incorporated into a broader  process of connecting households to larger energy systems.   SOLAR APPLIANCES  Solar appliances refer to individual appliances (torches, radios, cell-phone  chargers, lanterns) that run on solar power and provide energy services. The  major advantage of such appliances is that they have very low capital  requirements, have supply chains that can be established relatively easily, and  offer a big market for the private sector. There is evidence that such appliances  are having rapid and significant impacts on domestic energy systems, replacing  dry-cell batteries as well as solid and liquid fuels for illumination purposes  (Turman-Bryant et al., 2015). In two Kenyan towns, for example, the number of  off-grid lighting products rose by 77 percent between 2012 and 2014, with sales  from such products more than quadrupling, from $32,000 to $180,000, over the  same period (Turman-Bryant et al., 2015).  Challenges with solar appliances  The principal challenge for solar appliances is that they provide only small  quantities of electricity and have limited storage capabilities. As such, they are  only useful for meeting the lowest tiers of energy access and do not supply  motive power to support livelihood diversification or help meet thermal energy  service needs. In addition, because they are a new technology, uptake can be  slow. Such appliances have relatively low capital costs, but compared with  household incomes, they may still be considered expensive.  Solar appliances: Solutions  Little can be done about the limited capacity of such devices, but as with minigrids  and SHSs, future gains are possible from the development of low-watt  appliances and cheaper solar components. To improve uptake, it is thought that  providing guarantees of the quality of the devices, as well as socializing their  advantages over solid fuels, can increase households’ willingness to spend  relatively large sums of money on untested technologies (Turman-Bryant et al.,  2015).  Overall, under the right conditions, it appears that solar appliances can play an  important role in providing people with the lowest tiers of energy access. Their  rapid success in transforming the energy system in certain contexts suggests  that solar-powered devices are considered significantly superior to solid and  liquid fuels when it comes to illumination and that ICTs (which can only be  powered by electricity) are highly valued. Efforts thus need to be focused on  promoting these technologies and then incorporating them into a process that  delivers energy systems capable of more completely meeting people’s energy  needs.    4. ELECTRICITY AND ENERGY  POVERTY  Before discussing the empirical work on the impact of electrification on energy-poor  households, it is worth pointing out that there are significant experimental  challenges when it comes to testing this relationship. When areas receive  electricity (especially grid electricity), they also tend to be undergoing other  changes, such as significant economic and/or population growth, which means  that they are also likely to be experiencing other changes in terms of resourcing  and infrastructure. As a result, it is difficult to disentangle the impacts of  electrification on development from the effects of other processes taking place in  a population (Burlig & Preonas, 2016; Dinkelman, 2011; Khandker et al., 2009a).  To resolve these challenges, researchers have used a host of novel and  sophisticated methods.15 It is worth keeping in mind, however, that “in the end it  must be admitted that all cross-sectional analysis have their shortcomings, and  … [that] … impacts [of electrification] may be short-term. [In short:] The patterns  observed today may not hold in the future” (Khandker et al., 2009, p. 22).  Nonetheless, multiple works on electrification show a few recurrent features  regarding their impacts on household energy poverty, economic development,  and services.  IMPACTS ON HOUSEHOLD ENERGY POVERTY  When people receive access to electricity in their home, they principally use it for  lighting, entertainment and ICTs, and cooling. The results are increased use of  appliances, reduced candle and kerosene use, increased access to lighting, and  less time spent collecting fuels (Azimoh et al., 2015; Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016;  Broto et al., 2015; Dinkelman, 2011; Prasad & Visagie, 2006).  Beyond this, while access to electricity changes household fuel choices and  reduces the use of some solid fuels (Dinkelman, 2011), it generally does not  cause households to shift away from using predominantly solid fuels for cooking  and heating16 (Bailis et al., 2005; Broto et al., 2015; Gebreegziabher et al., 2012;  15 These methods include panel data, control groups (Khandker et al., 2009b), instrumental  variables (Dinkelman, 2011; Khandker et al., 2009a), regression discontinuity (Burlig &  Preonas, 2016), propensity score matching (Khandker et al., 2009a), and simple qualitative  impact assessments.  16 There are some minor exceptions to this finding around the use of electric rice cookers in Asia  (World Bank, 2008).   Khandker et al., 2009b; Madubansi & Shackleton, 2006; Malla & Timilsina, 2014;  Masera et al., 2000; Prasad & Visagie, 2006; World Bank, 2008). This overall  pattern persists even when electrification rates are high (Bailis et al., 2005; Broto  et al., 2015) and long after electricity access has been established (Bailis et al.,  2005; Cowan & Mohlakoana, 2005; World Bank, 2008). The relationship holds  among very wealthy households (Hiemstra-Van der Horst & Hovorka, 2008;  Khandker et al., 2010), including those in the 90th income percentile17 (Bacon et  al., 2010). It holds when access to fuelwood decreases (Madubansi &  Shackleton, 2006) and when electricity is the cheapest available fuel source  (Hosier & Kipondya, 1993). And the pattern largely holds across rural and urban  areas (Broto et al., 2015), though urban areas have seen greater use of  electricity for cooking (Bacon et al., 2010; Cowan & Mohlakoana, 2005).  Despite the failure to transition energy-poor households toward using electricity  for cooking and heating, electrification has a significant impact on people’s wellbeing.  For example, the illumination provided by SHSs in South Africa was found  to be used effectively to improve safety and scare away reptiles from people’s  dwellings. Access to entertainment has also been noted to improve people’s  quality of life (Azimoh et al., 2015; Prasad & Visagie, 2006). Finally, electrification  was found to have positive impacts on education by increasing study hours  (Azimoh et al., 2015; Khandker et al., 2009a; Prasad & Visagie, 2006) and school  enrollment rates (Khandker et al., 2009b). However, caution about simple  emphatic claims of the positive impact of electricity on education may be  warranted. A study involving 30,000 Indian villages, for example, showed no  evidence of increased school enrollment as a result of households’ being  provided with access to electricity through the grid (Burlig & Preonas, 2016).  The value of electricity to recently connected households is also evidenced by  the fact that newly connected areas are repeatedly found to experience a  subsequent increase in demand. This is thought to be due to households’ slowly  purchasing appliances that they have had to save up for (Khandker et al.,  2009b). This increase in demand also occurs after households get connected to  mini-grid projects (ARE, n.d.; Burlig & Preonas, 2016). The impact of appliance  purchases is compounded when households that were initially skeptical of the  project subsequently want to be connected after they witness the benefits  experienced by connected households. In fact, this trend is so common that it is  considered good practice to oversize mini-grid installations in order to cope with  the subsequent increases in demand that are likely to take place (ARE, n.d.). If  revealed preferences are an indicator of welfare maximization, then such  increases in demand speak to a robust trend whereby households gain  substantially from accessing electricity.  17 This percentile was measured as household earnings as much as $800 a month (2005,  purchasing power parity) (Bacon et al., 2010).  47 Addressing energy poverty  IMPACTS ON ECONOMIC DEVELOPMENT  While the evidence on the impact of electrification on household energy poverty  is clear, the evidence on the economic impacts of electrification is much more  ambiguous (Cook, 2011). Although the literature tends to agree that access to  electricity in rural areas does not drive industrialization (Dinkelman, 2011;  Khandker et al., 2009b; World Bank, 2008), the findings on the impacts on small  business development, livelihood diversification, and household incomes are  mixed. Reviews of the impacts of both grid connections and distributed energy  find no particularly noticeable impacts on economic development, which are  generally thought to be uncertain and largely anecdotal (Schillebeeck et al.,  2012; Terrapon-Pfaff et al., 2014). Yet there are single studies that find  systematic and generalizable impacts, showing that electrification drives  increases in income and improvements in economic activity. These mixed results  suggest that while electrification matters for economic development, by itself it is  insufficient to drive development, and other factors likely matter in determining  economic outcomes (Cook, 2011).  Reviews find that only a few households use electricity for productive purposes  (World Bank, 2008). Among those that do, the focus is on a few small business  owners who use electric lighting to extend their business hours (Azimoh et al.,  2015; Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016; Broto et al., 2015) or the small number of  households that use electricity to start new businesses, such as hairdressing  salons (Broto et al., 2015; K. Lee et al., 2014) and cold storage facilities (Broto et  al., 2015). In particular, electrification has been shown to favor the creation of  sectors that provide electronic services (such as showing TV, charging phones,  and playing music). Notably, there is limited evidence of households using  electricity for productive purposes involving motive power (such as carpentry or  milling) (Khandker et al., 2009b; K. Lee et al., 2014).  The limited effects of electrification on economic development have been  observed in both rural and urban contexts. A study of 30,000 Indian villages  electrified under the Prime Minister’s Rural Electrification Program,18 for example,  found that, at best, electrification leads to only small changes in economic  outcomes in the medium term (three to five years) (Burlig & Preonas, 2016). The  pattern persists in urban areas: in Cape Town’s informal settlements, for  example, electrification was found to have almost no discernable impact on  economic activity (Cowan & Mohlakoana, 2005).  On the other hand, studies showing strong generalizable links between access to  household energy and the creation of informal sector enterprises point out how  women’s income opportunities have been observed to increase in urban areas as  a result of access to electricity. Women use it to support commercial activities  such as dressmaking, washing, ironing, and hairdressing (Clancy, 2006). The  rollout of the grid in the KwaZulu Natal Province, in South Africa, was found to  drive an increase in employment, with female employment found to rise  significantly. Not only did electrification increase the number of jobs in rural  KwaZulu Natal, but it also increased the hours women worked, with most of this  work thought to come through the creation of cottage industries (Dinkelman,  2011). Large-scale studies on the impact of grid rollout in Bangladesh and  Vietnam found that access to electricity increased household incomes from both  on-farm and off-farm sources. In Vietnam the gains were greatest among on-farm  sources because electricity was used for irrigation (Khandker et al., 2009a;  Khandker et al., 2009b).  Increases in household incomes as a result of increasing energy access appear  to happen slowly at first, rising over time before they plateau. Again, the slow  increase is thought to be due to the time it takes households to be able to  purchase appliances necessary to take advantage of electricity to provide  services (Khandker et al., 2009a; Khandker et al., 2009b).  IMPACTS ON SERVICES  Little research has looked explicitly at the impact of electrification on the  availability and quality of services (Practical Action, 2014). That said, research on  the impacts of electrification in Maputo showed that people found the provision of  street lighting to be important for safety, for making it easier to run errands after  dark in the winding walkways of an informal settlement, and for creating a  welcoming neighborhood (Broto et al., 2015). Although expanding access to  electricity has been used to improve the cold chain (which is important for  vaccines) questions have been raised about whether this translates into  increases in immunization rates (World Bank, 2008). The largest impacts of  electricity on service provision are thought to result from a greater willingness on  the part of health and education workers to remain in rural areas once they are  electrified (World Bank, 2008).  Although energy is necessary for a host of services that can have profound  impacts on human well-being, simply providing electricity, whether from the grid  or from distributed sources, does not guarantee that people will start consuming  those energy services. In general, newly electrified households tend to use  electricity for lighting, communications, entertainment, and cooling. They do not,  for the most part, use electricity for cooking or heating. In terms of the economic  impacts of electricity access, the results are decidedly mixed. Many studies  indicate that economic impacts are small and limited to a few individuals, with the  deployment of electricity for motive power being extremely limited. At the same  time, other studies point to large, generalizable positive effects on income  49 Addressing energy poverty  through improved access to irrigation and the creation of cottage industries.  Predictions that rural electrification would lead to large-scale improvements in  well-being among poor populations in low-income countries, fueled by a huge  diversity of small-scale industries, do not appear to have been borne out in the  empirical literature to date. In terms of services while the evidence base is limited  access to electricity does appear to have improved access to services.  While the benefits to income and well-being that result from access to electricity  should not be overlooked, users’ failure to use electricity for thermal services,  and ambiguous findings on the economic impacts, present real challenges to  efforts at addressing energy poverty. In developing countries, cooking and  heating consume more household energy than any other activity—as much as 90  percent (Bhattacharyya, 2012; Malla & Timilsina, 2014)—and using solid fuels for  these activities drives the most severe negative health outcomes (Africa  Progress Panel, 2015). The limited use of electricity for productive purposes not  only suggests a failed opportunity to stimulate development gains, but also  strains the financing of energy projects. This is because exclusive domestic  energy use causes peak loads to concentrate in the early evening, increasing the  cost of the overall system (see Text Box 3) (World Bank, 2008). In addition, the  failure to increase household incomes threatens the long-term sustainability of  electricity access efforts because poor populations remain unable to afford the  tariffs that are required to cover the full costs of generating the electricity  (Terrapon-Pfaff et al., 2014) (see section on tariffs and subsidies below for  details).  As a result, efforts to address energy poverty need to go well beyond simply  providing access to electricity. They need to account for the persistent use of  solid fuels for meeting people’s thermal needs, and they need to integrate better  with the factors driving economic development.   5. BEYOND ELECTRICITY:  THINKING MORE BROADLY  ABOUT ENERGY ACCESS  In addition to improving access to electricity, any serious effort to address energy  poverty will need to pay greater attention to questions of energy for cooking and  heating. To understand why efforts at electrification have failed to address  household energy poverty, it is useful to begin by discussing the paradigm that  informed the strong focus on electricity.  UNDERSTANDING FUEL CHOICES  The hope that access to electricity would address household energy poverty  stems from a particular conception of how households make choices about fuels,  known as the “energy ladder” (Agbemabiese et al., 2012; Hiemstra-Van der Horst  & Hovorka, 2008; Masera et al., 2000). Under this conception, households are  expected to purchase the most sophisticated fuel they can afford based on what  is available to them. Households are expected to choose less-polluting, more  efficient fuels, so that they substitute dung for wood, wood for charcoal, charcoal  for kerosene, and kerosene for liquid petroleum gas (LPG) or electricity—with  each fuel representing a higher, rung on the energy ladder. In this model, wood is  the fuel of the poor, and people’s fuel choices are determined by constraints  related to access to fuels and low incomes (Hiemstra-Van der Horst & Hovorka,  2008). Thus the focus on electricity has been based on the assumption that  households have a natural preference for electricity and will use it based on the  savings to be had from using a more efficient, less locally polluting fuel. However,  the energy ladder has been criticized for ignoring human agency in fuel choices  and for doing a poor job at predicting them (Hiemstra-Van der Horst & Hovorka,  2008).  Subsequent empirical studies looking at fuel use have suggested that a more  effective conceptualization of fuel choices is the idea of “fuel stacking” (Bacon et  al., 2010; Hiemstra-Van der Horst & Hovorka, 2008; Masera et al., 2000). In this  conception, rather than simply exchanging traditional fuels for modern ones,  households make deliberate choices to use specific fuels to meet particular  needs (Hiemstra-Van der Horst & Hovorka, 2008; Madubansi & Shackleton,  2006). Choices regarding which fuels to keep in the household and when to use  them are based on assessments of both needs and opportunities, which are  51 Addressing energy poverty  located in complex household energy economies. Relevant considerations  include the availability and price of different fuels, cultural preferences for using  certain cooking methods, and the opportunity cost of acquiring those fuels  considering the resources available to the household (Bacon et al., 2010;  Gebreegziabher et al., 2012; Khandker et al., 2010; Khandker et al., 2009b;  Malla & Timilsina, 2014; Meikle & Bannister, 2003).  Fuel stacking accounts for the complex fuel choices that households have been  observed to make. Within this framework, the persistent use of solid fuels for  cooking and heating, even when electricity and LPG are available, is explained  by the fact that collected fuelwood has no monetary cost and because  household-labor is often abundant. Charcoal, which must be purchased, has the  advantage of being available in small quantities that match households’ limited  access to cash (Bacon et al., 2010). In contrast, LPG must be bought in a large  canister (a problem referred to as “lumpiness”19 in the literature), and many  households are unable to afford it at any one point in time (Cowan &  Mohlakoana, 2005). Finally, in addition to concerns around reliability mentioned  earlier, households continue to use solid fuels because of cultural preferences  regarding how different fuels affect the flavor of food and because the individuals  preparing food know how to use them. In this respect households have been  observed making highly strategic choices about using different fuels for different  foods—for example, making “modern foods” such as tea, coffee, and macaroni  on an electric hotplate while using fuelwood to prepare traditional foods that  require long simmering times (and that are also vulnerable blackouts if prepared  on an unreliable grid) (Cowan & Mohlakoana, 2005; Hiemstra-Van der Horst &  Hovorka, 2008).  Research on the complex energy economies apparent within households has  also found that households will maintain fuels such as kerosene and candles in  the home for illumination even when they have access to electricity (K. Lee et al.,  2016). The reason for this is that the grid is liable to suffer blackouts, and  SHS/mini-grid connections may not provide sufficient energy to cover illumination  needs for the whole household.  Overall, work on fuel choices has observed that although introducing modern  fuels into households drives changes in how households access energy services  (such as reducing the kerosene used for lighting), it does not lead to the  complete substitution of those fuels. Instead, when households gain access to  modern fuels, they tend to further diversify the array of fuels they use, adding  electricity and/or LPG to the mix (Madubansi & Shackleton, 2006; Masera et al.,  2000).  19 The issue of cash flow and fuel choice is addressed in the economic literature through the  concept of “lumpiness.” Lumpy items are those that cannot be bought in continuous or small  quantities, but which instead must be purchased in some large discrete quantity. If a fuel is  lumpy, it means that a household must have money on hand to afford it. For example, a large  LPG cylinder is lumpy because a household has to have enough cash on hand to pay for a fuel  supply that will serve them well into the future. Charcoal, however, can be purchased in small  quantities sufficient for a day’s worth of cooking. Given cash-flow constraints in energy-poor  households, the lumpiness of a fuel is thought to be an important consideration for access. As  such, it is suggested that modern fuels can be promoted if their supply chains allow for them to  be bought in small quantities that match household cash-flow dynamics.   Despite the abundant literature criticizing the concept of the energy ladder, the  ladder metaphor is invoked in contemporary discussions about energy access. In  contemporary conceptions however rungs of the energy ladder refer to the extent  to which households use modern fuels to access an increasing number of energy  services – essentially conflating the notion of a ladder rung, with tiers of energy  access. The first rung of the ladder, for example, is the use of electricity for  lighting, communications, and entertainment (see, e.g., Lee et al., 2016; Africa  Progress Panel, 2015). This new usage still focuses on the idea that people will  increasingly move toward using modern fuels to meet more of their energy  service needs and that their failure to do so is driven primarily by constraints on  their ability to choose their fuels. This conception still generally fails to account  for the agency of households in choosing fuels (Hiemstra-Van der Horst &  Hovorka, 2008). Problems of the energy ladder aside, it should be pointed out  that the fuel-stacking model, despite its advantages, fails to effectively explain  why and when households begin to abandon solid biomass fuels and use  modern fuels to meet all of their energy service needs.  The limitations of these respective models of fuel choice aside, both models have  focused heavily on the potential role of fuel price and income as constraints on  fuel choice. As such these two factors have received particular attention in the  literature.  THE IMPACT OF HOUSEHOLD INCOME AND FUEL  PRICE ON FUEL CHOICES  Within household energy economies, the impact of household income and fuel  price on fuel choices is particularly complex. On the one hand, income has been  shown not to determine household fuel choices (see above). On the other hand,  household income is repeatedly identified as one of the few factors that is reliably  associated with the likelihood that households will use more modern fuels (Lewis  & Pattanayak, 2012; Malla & Timilsina, 2014). Likewise, while fuel price has been  shown not to determine fuel choices, increases in the price of a particular fuel  have, in certain cases, been observed to cause households to revert to using  less desirable fuels (Malla & Timilsina, 2014; Meikle & Bannister, 2003). In other  cases, households respond to price increases by simply decreasing their energy  consumption and using less of that fuel or by minimizing other household  expenses to free up income to spend on the more expensive fuel (Meikle &  53 Addressing energy poverty  Bannister, 2003). Any fuel substitutions are likewise context specific and play out  in terms of the complex array of factors shaping the household energy economy.  One outcome of the complex relationship between fuel price, household income  and fuel choices is that research has noted how increased access to electricity  can have highly varied outcomes across different income groups. For example,  within groups that are all classified as monetarily poor, the wealthiest individuals  have been observed to make increasing use of modern fuels for thermal needs  (even though solid fuels remain the dominant source for thermal energy needs).  Among the poorest individuals, however, access to electricity has been shown to  drive no changes at all in the way people meet their thermal energy needs  (Prasad & Visagie, 2006). Such outcomes mirror findings showing that  electrification projects tend to primarily drive improvements in economic  outcomes among the wealthy and that access to electricity tends to benefit the  most well-off households while resulting in few to no economic impacts among  the poor (Bhattacharyya, 2012; World Bank, 2008).  The fact that solid fuels continue to dominate household energy use, however,  means that even with the provision of electricity, households are still exposed to  the myriad challenges involved with using those fuels (Cowan & Mohlakoana,  2005). Pollutants generated while cooking remain, as do the other the dangers  (e.g., burns) and the drudgery associated with collecting fuelwood and long  cooking times. Although exposure to particulates from burning kerosene might be  diminished as a result of the switch to electric lighting, the fact that households  still keep kerosene means that the risk of poisoning persists (Cowan &  Mohlakoana, 2005; K. Lee et al., 2014). Finally, given the persistence of candles  and kerosene, dangers of fire remain (though they may be diminished by their  decreased use) (Cowan & Mohlakoana, 2005). As such there is a clear need to  consider a broader set of approaches to addressing energy poverty than simply  focusing on access to electricity.  THE ROLE FOR IMPROVED COOKSTOVES  Given the problems associated with the persistent use of solid biomass for  cooking, it is clear why promoting “clean” or “improved cookstoves” (hereafter  “improved cookstoves”) is an important complementary approach to  electrification. Although there is currently no formal definition of an improved  cookstove, it generally refers to any stove that cooks more efficiently than the  traditional three-stone stove (Practical Action, 2014).  The potential impacts of improved cookstoves range from a simple reduction in  indoor air pollution as a result of improved combustion rates to the virtual  elimination of pollutants in stoves that incorporate forced ventilation. Beyond  reducing pollution, improved cookstoves also reduce cooking times and fuel   requirements. Together the result is improved health outcomes, less time  collecting fuel, savings from reduced purchase of fuel, and less environmental  stress on stores of fuelwood (Lewis & Pattanayak, 2012).  While the designs of improved charcoal-burning cookstoves are well established,  fuelwood cookstoves are still a challenge as they must be specifically designed  to handle local fuels, which can vary by moisture content, size of the logs, and  the density of wood (Modi et al., 2006).  Although efforts to promote improved cookstoves have been ongoing since the  1980s (Agbemabiese et al., 2012; Bhattacharyya, 2012), rates of adoption have  been frustratingly slow (Bhattacharyya, 2012; Malla & Timilsina, 2014). As of  2009, for example, only 4 percent of the population of sub-Saharan Africa had  access to improved cookstoves (WHO-UNDP, 2009). Part of the problem is that,  with the heavy focus on electrification, clean cookstoves have received relatively  little policy attention (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016). More recently, the issue of  clean cookstoves has gained greater traction at an international level with the  creation of the Alliance for Clean Cookstoves, which plans to foster the adoption  of clean cookstoves and fuels in 100 million households by 2020 (Bhattacharyya,  2012; Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves, n.d.).  Questions about the barriers to, and determinants of, clean cookstove adoption  have spawned an extensive literature. Several factors have consistently been  found to show a positive association with the use of improved cookstoves:  degree of urbanization, household income, and education and awareness  (Gebreegziabher et al., 2012; Lewis & Pattanayak, 2012; Malla & Timilsina,  2014). The relevance of education and awareness has been found to vary  depending on who is educated—it is women and the household head whose  education drive increased use of improved cookstoves (Lewis & Pattanayak,  2012; Malla & Timilsina, 2014).  Findings from the literature on the adoption of improved cookstoves tend to  mirror the findings on the adoption of improved fuels, and lessons from the  discussion on the energy ladder are relevant. The factors listed above should be  seen as associated with improved cookstove adoption rather than determining it.  Like fuel choices, improved cookstove adoption needs to be understood within  the larger social context in which households make complex decisions regarding  the suitability of different technologies (Lewis & Pattanayak, 2012). This context  includes, for example, cultural preferences about cooking and the suitability of  stove technologies in relation to cultural norms (Agbemabiese et al., 2012; Broto  et al., 2015; Malla & Timilsina, 2014). Finally, evidence on the importance of  female education in fuel choices suggests that previous explanations regarding  the persistence of solid biomass for cooking based on its low monetary cost  might actually be determined by the opportunity cost of women’s time, with that  cost increasing when women are educated (Madubansi & Shackleton, 2006).  LIQUID PETROLEUM GAS (LPG)  Beyond policies promoting improved cookstoves, the other dominant solution to  persistent energy poverty has been promoting the use of LPG. While such  policies have had some success, for example in India, challenges remain around  efforts to make LPG a common household fuel among the poor. Such challenges  include weak supply chains (Bacon et al., 2010; Clancy, 2006), especially in rural  areas, and the “lumpiness” of the fuel20 (which can be exacerbated by supply  chain problems if households have to purchase backup canisters) (Bacon et al.,  2010). In addition, qualitative studies have revealed that people have concerns  about the safety of LPG, fearing that the canisters are liable to explode  (Madubansi & Shackleton, 2006). As with electricity, adoption of LPG is hindered  by the fact that people must purchase appliances in order to cook with it or use it  for heating (Bhattacharyya, 2012). As a result, LPG use faces many of the same  barriers as the use of improved cookstoves. Finally, some authors have identified  cultural barriers to the use of LPG, reporting that people complain that food  tastes different when prepared using LPG (Clancy, 2008).  Text Box 5: Biodigesters  Along with distributed renewable electricity generation technologies, local biogas  digesters are frequently identified as a means of addressing energy poverty by  complementing distributed electricity generation with energy for cooking and thermal  services. Yet, while biodigesters have made a significant impact in some contexts, they  have proven a difficult technology to get right, and caution should be exercised when  advocating for biogas digesters as a short-term solution to energy poverty.  Biodigesters generate combustible gas from organic waste (from humans, animals, and  crop residues) through the decomposition of organic matter in an anaerobic  environment. In addition to gas, the slurry from biodigesters can be used as fertilizer,  which restores nutrients to the soil more effectively than regular composting21 (Smith et  al., 2014). The gas from a biodigester can be used for household cooking, requiring only  a slightly modified butane-burning stove (Bond & Templeton, 2011). Biogas can also be  used to generate electricity through a modified diesel generator, but this requires first  scrubbing the sulfur out of the gas, a task that is not amenable to remote locations. It is  also possible to use the gas to drive a fuel cell, but the gas again needs to be very  clean, and overall this is considered to be a development technology (Bond &  Templeton, 2011). The principal benefits of biodigesters for rural energy access, then,  are gas for cooking and slurry for fertilizer.  Biodigesters are a simple technology that has been in use as far back as the 10th  century BCE as well as in ancient China (Bond & Templeton, 2011). In its simplest form,  20 See footnote 18.  21 The WHO warns that slurry produced using human waste is not suitable for use as agricultural  fertilizer without pasteurization (Bond & Templeton, 2011).   the digester is merely a sealed chamber—usually a bladder placed in a hole in the  ground—into which is placed a mix of organic waste and water. Where biodigesters  have been successfully established, they have been shown to provide significant  benefits to households by decreasing household expenditures on fuelwood, saving time  on the collection of fuel, and decreasing cooking time (M. T. Smith et al., 2014). Biogas  is also considered a clean and carbon-neutral fuel, so long as the organic matter is  collected sustainably (Bond & Templeton, 2011).  Biodigesters require significant amounts of animal waste and water for their operation.  Requirements vary depending on the type of animal waste, which, in turn determines  the water requirements. On average, it is estimated that generating enough gas to cook  two meals a day for a family of five requires access to the equivalent of 20–30 kg of  cattle dung (or four to five head of cattle) along with an equivalent amount of water  (Bond & Templeton, 2011; Smith et al., 2014). Biodigesters are only effective in  temperatures between 15oC and 40oC. Below these temperatures, there is scope for  heating and stirring the slurry using solar energy, but such additions increase the plant’s  complexity. The labor costs of collecting the waste to feed the digester have proven  hard to overcome (Smith et al., 2014); as such, for biodigesters to run effectively,  animals generally need to be stabled on concrete floors (Bond & Templeton, 2011).  Such requirements mean that biodigesters are generally not suitable for urban  households, other than in large-scale facilities (such as next to abattoirs) (Smith et al.,  2014).  China has had significant success using biodigesters to improve energy access, with an  estimated 26–27 million plants in the country (Bhattacharyya, 2012; Bond & Templeton,  2011). India has also had some success, with about 4 million plants. Biogas, however,  is not necessarily a quick solution to energy poverty in sub-Saharan Africa. It took China  about 40 years to build its extensive infrastructure, with a great deal of support from the  state for research, financing, training for technicians, creation of supply chains, and  promotion of the technology. In addition, China had certain advantages, such as its  large manufacturing base, that were important in its success (Bhattacharyya, 2012).  Overall, it is estimated that China provided a subsidy of $200–$400 per household for  biogas plants (Bhattacharyya, 2012), with historic subsidies covering between 30 and  100 percent of plant costs in the 1980s and 1990s (Bond & Templeton, 2011).  Laborious maintenance procedures have been the principal challenge to the successful  deployment and use of biodigesters (Bond & Templeton, 2011; Modi et al., 2006). As a  result of poor maintenance, only about 50 percent of biodigesters around the world are  thought to be operational (Bond & Templeton, 2011). Such challenges even affect  China, where only about 60 percent of biogas digesters were estimated to be operating  normally in 2006. The number of plants currently operating in any single African country  is in the hundreds (Bond & Templeton, 2011).  Given high cattle counts in Africa, biodigesters could potentially have important effects  on energy poverty, but to address thermal energy needs completely, biodigesters will  need to incorporate crop residues more effectively. Currently, the gas produced using  crops residues is too high in carbon dioxide (Bond & Templeton, 2011). In addition,  stabling of cattle is uncommon in Africa and access to water is limited in certain areas  (Smith, 2011). Adoption of biogas also faces challenges in terms of social norms  57 Addressing energy poverty  surrounding the preparation of food using gas generated from human and animal waste.  Like LPG, biogas requires the use of a modern stove appliance and as such faces the  same barriers as efforts to promote improved cookstoves.  Finally, although biodigesters are a relatively cheap and simple technology, the capital  costs are still thought to be high compared with the incomes of rural, energy-poor  households in sub-Saharan Africa (Bond & Templeton, 2011). Studies suggest that  making the technology financially feasible to low-income rural households in South  Africa, for example, would require a subsidy of nearly $2,000 per household (at 2014  prices) and credit structures in which the repayment rate is on the order of 15 years.  Despite such high costs, even with subsidies, the welfare benefits of switching to biogas  were thought to be significant (Smith, 2011).  Although biogas presents significant opportunities for improving livelihoods, attempts to  implement biogas projects in developing countries have had limited success (Terrapon-  Pfaff et al., 2014). Overall, “biogas recovery technology has been a failure in many  developing countries with low rates of technology transfer and longevity and a  reputation for being difficult to operate and maintain” (Bond & Templeton, 2011, p. 347).   6. DEBATES AND ISSUES  CONCERNING ENERGY  ACCESS  Despite the complexity of the processes shaping household energy choices, as  well as the technical challenges involved in providing households with electricity,  there has been something of a simplification of the public conversation about  energy policy and the need to balance Africa’s imperative to develop with the  need to address climate change. Some debates have been simplified while other  crucial dynamics of effective energy policy have been overlooked. The rest of this  report explores the following questions and issue areas: (1) the merits of grid  versus decentralized approaches to providing energy access; (2) the challenge of  connection fees and last-mile connections; (3) the use of modern versus  traditional fuels in addressing energy poverty; (4) how best to address the  challenge of setting tariffs and providing energy subsidies, (5) the possibilities for  improving the economic benefits of electrification, and (6) challenges in financing  increased energy access.  GRID EXPANSION VERSUS DISTRIBUTED  TECHNOLOGIES  Recent debate has emerged over whether energy poverty is best addressed by  expanding the grid or by providing distributed energy technologies. Within this  debate, proponents on both sides have been guilty of playing up the advantages  of a particular approach while often overlooking its challenges and limitations.  They have contrasted generous appraisals of one technology with equivalently  unsympathetic accounts of competing technologies. Proponents of distributed  technologies, for example, argue that the grid is expensive and slow to roll out,  and that it is run by an unresponsive bureaucracy. Further they note that the grid  has failed to provide energy to the poor in sub-Saharan Africa and that it is based  on technology that drives climate change. In contrast, they characterize  distributed technologies as cheap to deliver, capable of quickly providing  electricity access to the poor, amenable to delivery by the private sector (thereby  avoiding the problems of the state bureaucracy), and well suited to using  renewable energy.  Proponents of expanding the grid point to relatively successful cases of improved  energy access through grid expansion, such as in Tunisia, South Africa, and  59 Addressing energy poverty  Vietnam (Khandker et al., 2009b; Modi et al., 2006) (see Text Box 6). They note  the higher cost of electricity from mini-grids and the low capacities of SHSs,  suggesting that such systems do not provide households with “real electricity”  (Wolfram, 2016).  Text Box 6: Expanding access to electricity in South Africa  South Africa is the only mainland sub-Saharan African country to have achieved  significant success at increasing access to electricity. Its experience, however, reveals  the importance of local contextual factors, as well as the complicated ways in which  local political and economic incentives play out in driving and frustrating effective  management of the power sector.  The scale of South Africa’s success at expanding access to electricity is notable. In  1993, a year before the end of apartheid, more than two-thirds of South African  households lacked access to electricity. By 2001, more than 2 million households (or  one-quarter of all households in the country) had been connected, principally through  expansion of the grid (Dinkelman, 2011), but also through the provision of solar home  systems (Azimoh et al., 2015). This progress took South Africa’s electrification rate from  34 to 70 percent (Prasad & Visagie, 2006). All of these new connections were fully  subsidized, and in 2003 electricity access was further supported through the  implementation of a free basic electricity allowance (Dinkelman, 2011).  Understanding why such dramatic change was possible requires looking at the political  and economic conditions dominant in the country at the time. First, in 1993, unlike other  African countries, South Africa had significant excess generation capacity, for several  reasons. It had access to abundant cheap coal. It had expertise in electricity generation,  driven in part by the large extractive industry activity in the country. Its energy sector  achieved high efficiencies by taking advantage of economies of scale and technical  innovations. And it had overinvested in generation capacity in the 1970s, based on  overly optimistic economic growth forecasts made at the time (Cowan & Mohlakoana,  2005). In addition, Eskom, the sole electricity provider in the country at the end of  apartheid, wanted to signal to the new government that it could provide electricity to  previously disadvantaged communities without the need to introduce private competition  (Dinkelman, 2011). The result of this combination of factors was an ambitious plan to  expand access to electricity that was supported by both the state and the utility, which  had the generation capacity to support such expansion.  As households have been connected (as of 2012, electrification rates stood at 85  percent (World Bank, 2012)) and the country’s economy has grown, however, the  situation of excess generation capacity has changed. As early as 1998 the government  reported that increasing demand would lead to electricity shortages. These warnings  were ignored on grounds that the utility might be privatized. Plans to increase  generation capacity were implemented in 2004, but by 2008 the country was  implementing load shedding, after generating reserves reached their lowest-ever levels  (Phaahla, 2015a). New production was focused on the construction of 4800MW, to be  supplied via a coal-fired power plant at Medupi. Although this project was meant to be   completed in four years at a cost of R69 billion ($9.5 billion), seven years later only one  of the plant’s proposed six reactors is online, providing 794MW of power. The project is  now scheduled for completion in 2019, with an updated cost estimate of R159 billion  ($12.2 billion) (Phaahla, 2015b). The project has also been mired in claims of  corruption. The ruling party, the African National Congress (ANC), owns a 25 percent  stake in the company that was awarded the construction contract, an outcome that  would net the ANC about R1 billion (Mail and Guardian, 2010).  The power utility, Eskom, currently finds itself in financial difficulty, with sovereign creditrating  agencies having downgraded it to junk status. A proposed 25 percent tariff  increase, aimed at remedying the situation, was rejected by the national energy  regulator, partly on the grounds that Eskom’s books are not transparently available for  public scrutiny (Phaahla, 2015a).  The South African story highlights a number of general lessons regarding the technical  and political-economic dimensions of energy access. First, the particular factors driving  access are unique to the country, and thus calling on countries to simply replicate  successes seen elsewhere may be of limited use. Second, the factors driving huge  increases in electricity access have little to do with generic features of good  governance, such as transparency or accountability. Third, if a country seeks to  increase access through grid expansion, it needs to focus heavily on expanding  generation capacity and maintaining the grid. Failure to do so will only result in a less  reliable grid for all users. Fourth, problems of governance and state capture of utilities  remains a threat, and in this respect generic good governance efforts can play a role.  Finally, challenges related to the financial viability of utilities and the issue of tariffs are  problems even in countries with mature power systems and established supply chains,  and even when cheap energy resources are abundant.  Considering all of the evidence, however, it is clear that neither technology is  likely to act as a panacea to the challenge of increasing electricity access given  the context in sub-Saharan Africa today (not to mention that electricity access is  not a panacea to energy poverty). The grid has failed too many people in Africa  for too long, providing energy to better-off urban groups while leaving behind  poor people in remote rural areas. At the same time, distributed energy  technologies face many challenges, including institutional ones that will require  support from the state, which will need to take a proactive role in legislation and  subsidization (see below). Without these, efforts focused on distributed  technology have similarly ended up benefiting relatively well-off individuals and  failed to bring access to the poorest members of society (TERI-GNESD, 2014;  World Bank, 2008). In addition, the services offered by distributed generation  sources are more expensive and often limited in quantity, limiting their capacity to  provide people with all of the energy services they need. As such, effectively  addressing energy access will require both connecting remote and isolated  households through distributed technologies and expanding the grid and  increasing access to it.  It is thought that grid extension will be the best means for increasing access in  urban areas, while the goal of increasing access to electricity among rural  populations will, in most cases, be best met through a focus on distributed  technologies. Such an approach will be faster to deploy and cheaper than waiting  for grid expansion. Areas with sufficient population density can be connected  through mini-grids, and the remainder can be connected using SHSs and solar  appliances (Alstone et al., 2015; World Bank & IEA, 2015).  Despite the advantages of distributed technologies in connecting households, the  eventual goal should be to connect everyone to the grid, which will provide  households with the best-quality electricity at the lowest price (Alstone et al.,  2015; Lee et al., 2016). A large grid will also allow for diversity in the energy  system and be crucial to supporting the high levels of renewable energy  penetration needed to address climate change (see Part 1 of this series). As  such, energy policy should focus simultaneously on leveraging investment in  distributed energy technologies and on improving the function and scale of the  grid, as well as access to it.  Although the specifics of rolling out on-grid and distributed technologies will vary  by country, based on factors such as the existing extent of the grid, institutional  capacity, economic capacity, geography, demography, topography, and the  availability of different resources (Schillebeeck et al., 2012), some common  features of energy policy will be necessary. Among other things, policies must (1)  increase grid-connected generation capacity, (2) increase grid efficiency, (3)  improve demand-side management, (4) ensure the affordability of electricity, (5)  ensure the quality of electricity infrastructure, (6) reduce perverse tax incentives  on distributed generation components (see below on subsidies), (7) support the  creation of effective supply chains (including installation and maintenance), (8)  undertake resource assessments, and (9) address uncertainty in the rollout of the  grid. The last of these should include making the plans for grid rollout explicit,  ensuring that distributed infrastructure will be able to integrate with the grid when  it arrives, and putting mechanisms in place to reduce the financial risks to private  sector actors regarding the arrival of the grid. All of these actions will be crucial to  driving private-sector investment in distributed energy systems. Finally, because  the process of rolling out the grid is likely to take many years, policies supporting  distributed generation need to include realistic estimates of likely cost reductions  in batteries and solar panels.  LAST-MILE CONNECTIONS  If issues of urban energy access are going to be solved via the grid, and if  distributed energy is only a stop-gap solution to efforts at electrification, then any  comprehensive energy access policy needs to consider how to deal with the   costs of actually connecting households to the grid—also known as “last-mile”  connections.  Issues of cost  The principal challenge when it comes to last-mile connections is their high cost,  which is consistently identified as a major impediment to improving electricity  access via grid expansion (K. Lee et al., 2014; Modi et al., 2006; Scott et al.,  2003) (see Text Box 7). Specifically, last-mile connections refer to the distribution  network for electricity (see Text Box 3). The costs of the distribution network  stem from the cost of wire and poles needed to carry the electricity, as well the  labor costs of installing this infrastructure. In general, the distribution network  comprises a medium-voltage line that carries the current from the transformer  linked to the transmission network. Households then connect to this medium-voltage  line via secondary distribution lines on which the voltage has been  stepped down again in order to deliver electricity to the household. On top of the  costs of these additions to the network, there can be costs to the household,  which must be wired and metered (see section on tariffs below) before it can  receive electricity. The cost of last-mile connections therefore generally depends  on how far the household is from the substation, which determines how much  wire, how many poles, and how much labor will be required. Last-mile  connections are a challenge because they pertain to every household that is to  be connected; given the number of households, the cost of connecting all  households can get very large very quickly (K. Lee et al., 2014).  The high cost of connecting households to the grid is often cited as grounds for  promoting distributed energy technologies ahead of grid expansion. This  argument is somewhat misleading. Mini-grid technologies also have costs  associated with connecting households; distribution lines must still run from the  generating plant to the households. As with the grid, the cost of these  connections depends on the distance between the households and the plant.  And if the goal is to ensure that the mini-grid infrastructure can later be  incorporated into the grid, the infrastructure linking households to the power plant  must match that needed to connect households to the grid.  Despite the fact that connection costs are an issue for mini-grids, the cost of  distribution infrastructure is often left out of mini-grid discussions, so much so  that even the HOMER model (which is the most prominent model for calculating  mini-grid sizing requirements) does not include inputs related to distribution costs  (Bhattacharyya, 2015). The difference between connection costs for mini-grids  and those for the main grid is that grid connection fees are usually standardized,  whereas in the case of mini-grids efforts are made to reduce the capital costs of  the system through the sorts of bespoke approaches that were described in the  section on mini-grids.  63 Addressing energy poverty  Despite the high costs of last-mile connections, however, studies consistently  find that the welfare and economic benefits of connecting to the grid far outweigh  the costs22 (Khandker et al., 2009a, 2009b). When large numbers of households  live within reach of the grid but are not connected to it—a condition termed living  “under the grid”23 (K. Lee et al., 2014)—the result is not only forgone welfare, but  also forgone revenues to the utility, which is unable to charge users and thus  unable to recoup on the investments made in expanding the grid. In Kenya it is  estimated that as many as 95 percent of households and 78 percent of  businesses that are close enough to be connected to the grid remain  unconnected (K. Lee et al., 2014). In Nigeria estimates suggest that 31 million  people could be living under the grid, accounting for 40 percent of all Nigerians  without electricity (Leo et al., n.d.).  To help reduce connection costs, innovations have included privatizing the  distribution network or using cheaper materials for the poles. In both cases,  however, it should be remembered that maintaining the infrastructure and  ensuring the fairness of tariffs are important for long-term sustainability. Another  option is to bundle many households so that connection costs are shared  between them. This approach has shown to reduce connection costs  dramatically (see Text Box 7) (K. Lee et al., 2014; Prasad & Visagie, 2006).  22 Benefits exceed costs by as much as 150 percent in Bangladesh (Khandker et al., 2009a) and  are four times greater in Vietnam.  23 This term was created by K. Lee et al. (2014) to describe households that do not fit into the  binary categories of “on the grid” (i.e., connected to the grid) and “off the grid” (too far away to  connect to the grid).  24 In 2002 the exact cost for an individual connection was 10,000 Botswana pula.  Text box 7: Connection fees and bundling of households  While the actual cost of connecting to the grid varies by country (owing to variations in  the costs of materials and labor), it is often prohibitively high. In Kenya, for example, it  currently costs about $2,000 to connect a single household to the grid, assuming that  the household is located less than 200 meters from the substation (K. Lee et al.,  2014). In Botswana in 2002, full cost recovery on connection costs meant that it cost  about $1,000 to connect a household to the grid24 (Prasad & Visagie, 2006). Given  that average annual household income in Africa was $762 in 2008 (Lakner &  Milanovic, 2013), it is clear why many households remain unconnected even if they  are located close to the grid.  One potentially useful option to get around the problem of high connection costs  (assuming population densities are high enough) is to bundle households together  when connecting them (Modi et al., 2006). Bundling households takes advantage of   Obviously the process of bundling households creates coordination as well as  bureaucratic challenges: households first have to know and understand that a  system for bundling them exists, then they must agree to act together and inform  the utility of their willingness to connect. Given that challenges around processing  paperwork have been shown to be an impediment to connecting individual  households that are currently under the grid (Broto et al., 2015), these challenges  should not be overlooked, and energy policies must include allowances to deal  with them. Notably, however, such challenges are thought likely to be inherent in  operationalizing the sort of bespoke energy systems that will be required to make  mini-grids cost competitive.  25 This is, in fact, a classic quality of the grid’s economies of scale and its character as an almost  perfect monopoly: capital costs of extending the grid are high, but once those capital costs have  been paid, the marginal cost of adding one more household to the grid is relatively small.  26 Under the bundling scheme households paid a Pula 100 down payment of 5%, before paying the  other 95% back over a period of 18, 60 or 180 months (Prasad & Visagie, 2006).  27 This result assumes that the distribution line would be extended 200 meters from the substation  and then connected to every household within 30 meters of that line.  28 Notably, this is the same price as the popular solar kits sold by M-Kopa.  the fact that once one house is connected, it becomes cheaper to connect any  neighboring house because the necessary low-voltage power line is already in  place.25 Bundling households involves extending low-voltage lines to their maximum  distance from the substation and then connecting all of the households that lie within  a short distance of that low-voltage line. Instead of connecting only one household at  the end of the low-voltage power line, this approach connects multiple households to  a single line. This allows the cost of connection (in terms of low-voltage power lines,  poles, and labor) to be split among all the connected households, significantly  reducing the cost.  This approach has been used successfully in Botswana, where the connection policy  was amended after it was found that individual households were unable to afford the  full connection cost. In that scheme four or more households had to come together to  apply for a connection. Doing so brought the cost of connecting an individual  household in 2002 down from about $1,000 to about $20026 (Prasad & Visagie,  2006). Likewise, theoretical work in Kenya has shown that bundling households that  are currently under the grid could bring prices down from $2,000 per connection to  $80 per connection.27 At this price it has been estimated that households would only  have to generate $10 a year in terms of improved welfare from their access to  electricity in order to make the connection welfare-improving. Furthermore, the same  analysis found that households only need to be bundled into groups of six in order to  get connection fees to around $200 per household28 (K. Lee et al., 2014). The low  connection costs for mini-grids take advantage of this this bundling approach.  65 Addressing energy poverty  Beyond cost: Tenure and connections  Although discussions and policies about last-mile connections often focus on  cost, it is important to recognize that some households remain under the grid  because of institutional challenges related to land tenure and the informal nature  of settlements in urban areas. Informal dwellings often lack an address, which  makes it impossible to receive bills or have a meter installed. Likewise, informal  dwellings that are located on land owned by someone other than the dweller,  close to other infrastructure (such as roads or railways), or in flood plains can  create problems for all manner of service delivery, as the state is usually  unwilling, or legally unable, to provide infrastructure or services under such  conditions (Cowan & Mohlakoana, 2005; Modi et al., 2006). Since it is often the  poorest individuals who occupy such marginal land, efforts to address energy  access among poor populations need to include allowances for such challenges.  It is possible that distributed energy technologies, which have few permanent  infrastructural features (such as solar appliances or SHSs), might play an  important role in improving energy access for people living on legally  unserviceable land, but no such cases were identified in this research.  Finally, in addition to the above measures, given the low incomes of many  unconnected rural households, energy policy will need to include some  mechanism for financing the costs, as households are unlikely to have access to  capital on the scale required. The most common means for doing this is to  include some portion of the connection fee in the electricity tariff, which allows  households to pay the connection fee over an extended period. On top of this, in  some cases, subsidies will still be required to connect very poor households  (Modi et al., 2006; Prasad & Visagie, 2006).  TARIFFS AND SUBSIDIES  Issues of tariffs and subsidies may be the most crucial element of any electricity  access effort. If tariffs are too low to allow for cost recovery, then electricity  infrastructure will not be sustainable in the long term because there will not be  enough resources available for maintenance, replacement of components, and  ongoing investment (Africa Progress Panel, 2015; ARE, n.d.; Prasad & Visagie,  2006). At the same time, if tariffs are based only on cost recovery and financial  sustainability, the poorest populations are likely to continue to be excluded from,  or remain without, the benefits of access to significant quantities of electricity. It is  thus widely appreciated that some form of targeted subsidies will be necessary to  enable energy access among certain groups (ARE, n.d.; Bhattacharyya & Palit,  2016; World Bank, 2008) (see Text Box 4).   Electricity tariffs  African grid tariffs are much higher than the tariffs paid by consumers in other  parts of the developing world—as much as three times higher on average (World  Bank, 2013)—but they are not considered sufficient to cover the costs of energy  generation. The reason for this seeming paradox is that historically weak tariff  collection and an unwillingness to charge the full recovery cost of electricity  infrastructure have resulted in financial problems for many African utilities. These  financial problems have, in turn, prevented utilities from investing suitably in  generation capacity and maintaining the grid. The result is a grid that is inefficient  (experiencing high losses) as well as a lack of finance for new generation  capacity. Together these problems have left many African countries reliant on  leased, emergency generation capacity, which uses expensive fuels such as oil  (Africa Progress Panel, 2015; Eberhard et al., 2008). Consequently, although  Africans now pay some of the highest tariffs in the world, they are still not  sufficient to cover the costs of expensive generation (Africa Progress Panel,  2015; Eberhard et al., 2008). Africans will need to pay higher tariffs in the short  run in order to bring tariffs down in the long run. Raising tariffs, however, is  politically difficult in Africa (Eberhard et al., 2008), where many countries have  displayed strong political opposition to efforts at raising prices in order to make  utilities financially sound (World Bank, 2005). In 2008, a survey of 20 African  countries identified only 10 that were collecting tariffs sufficient to cover historical  operating costs and only 6 that were able to cover all historical costs, including  the cost of capital (Eberhard et al., 2008).  Dynamics of this sort show how important it is to get tariffs right, ensure bill  collection, and limit theft. In the long run, if the utility is not financially sustainable  the cost of electricity will go up. Given the gross mismanagement of African  utilities that has led to this dire situation, some advocates of distributed electricity  solutions argue that the answer to Africa’s energy access challenge does not lie  with grid expansion. Furthermore, such high utility tariffs in Africa improve the  competitiveness of distributed technologies, which have struggled to be  competitive with the utilities in Asia.  Tariff structures can take many forms, each suited to a different context. Possibly  the simplest is a flat tariff, whereby all consumers pay the same amount  regardless of how much electricity they use. Such a simple structure makes bill  collection straightforward. It can also help increase the energy consumption of  poor households, which pay the same amount regardless of how much electricity  they use. However, flat tariffs will almost certainly be unsustainable as  households start to use more energy than they are effectively paying for,  resulting in problems for the electricity generator. In addition, a flat tariff can  exclude poor households that do not have the income to pay for the regular fee  (Prasad & Visagie, 2006).  67 Addressing energy poverty  Excessive consumption of electricity in mini-grids, based on a simple flat tariff  system, can be prevented by installing load limiters, which limit how much  electricity any one user can consume. Such an approach ensures that the  generation capacity of the system is not overloaded (which is important for longterm  sustainability in terms of battery use; see Text Box 3), though load limiters  increase up-front system costs (Deshmukh et al., 2013; TERI-GNESD, 2014).  An alternative to a flat tariff is a consumption-based tariff, whereby consumers  pay based on the amount of electricity they use. This system is much more  sustainable because users cover the full cost of their consumption. It also creates  an incentive for demand-side management. The downside is that the system  requires the installation, maintenance, and checking of meters as part of bill  collection—all of which increase the costs and management complexity of the  overall system (Deshmukh et al., 2013). In cases where the amount of electricity  being consumed is very small, the cost of metering can be hard to justify. The  use of meters can also result in unforeseen problems: households have been  known to tamper with them in order to steal electricity. One way to address this is  to place meters on the outside of people’s homes so that tampering can easily be  identified. A final advantage of meters is that they allow for energy to be priced  differentially (for example, making it more expansive at peak times). This  approach can help redistribute the load on the system, increasing the system’s  overall financial viability (see Text Box 3); it is not possible with a flat tariff  (Bhattacharyya, 2015).  Progressive tariffs are a final option, whereby the price a household pays for  electricity is based on a sliding scale. Users who consume the most electricity  pay the highest tariff, whereas smaller consumers pay a lower tariff. This system  allows larger (usually wealthier) consumers to subsidize the access of smaller  (usually poorer) consumers. It also gives households incentives to manage their  demand. Again, such a system requires metering and suffers the associated  challenges. While progressive tariffs might seem to be the obvious choice, their  suitability can depend on how energy is consumed. In many parts of sub-  Saharan Africa it is common for households with a grid connection to provide  connections to neighbors who live in informal structures and charge them for the  electricity they use. Under this system, because the connected household is  consuming a large amount of electricity, it will be subject to a higher tariff, which  is then passed on to the informally connected (and usually poor) households,  defeating the purpose of the progressive pricing system (Meikle & Bannister,  2003). Progressive subsidies may also overburden wealthy households, causing  them to use less energy or replace electricity with LPG (Cook, 2011). In such  cases the viability of the overall tariff system can be compromised as the utility  loses revenue and the possibility for cross-subsidization is undermined  Finally, for access purposes, it may be necessary to ensure that bill collection  schedules coincide with income cycles in the areas of newly connected   households. For example, subsistence households do not earn monthly incomes,  but rather receive income at the end of the harvest season. Though matching bill  collection to periods when households have money can be important for  improving access and sustainability, it tends to increase the administrative cost of  bill collection (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016; Scott et al., 2003). An effective  means for getting around such problems has been the installation of pre-paid  meters. While there is some cost to install these meters, as well as institutional  requirements to ensure they are maintained, pre-paid meters reduce collection  costs, and most reports indicate that households are happy to be able to avoid  surprise electricity bills (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016; Broto et al., 2015; Mushi,  2014). Possibilities for pre-paid meters are also thought to be growing with the  advent of mobile money29 and cell phone technologies, which allow users to  purchase electricity on a pre-paid basis using a cell phone. As with regular  meters, though, tampering with pre-paid meters has been observed in Tanzania,  resulting in theft of electricity and financial challenges for the utility (Mushi, 2014).  Innovative models for ensuring bill collection—such as having bills be the  responsibility of groups of people in order to create peer pressure for payment—  have also been shown to increase collection rates (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016).  While tariffs are important for cost recovery, and despite the challenging situation  in Africa, researchers have pointed out that simply raising tariffs so that they  cover costs would place too great a burden on households (Africa Progress  Panel, 2015). For example, where African grid tariffs are as high as $0.25/kWh,  for a household consuming as little as 50kWh/month, monthly expenditure on  electricity will quickly exceed 5 percent of their income (assuming household  income of $260/month) (Eberhard et al., 2008) (see Text Box 4).  In this regard, a singular focus on cost recovery as the basis for setting tariffs  (itself a by-product of the privatization of utilities) is thought to have resulted in  skewing energy access heavily toward urban areas and nonpoor groups who  have the ability to pay (Mostert, 2008; Scott et al., 2003). In Botswana, for  example, such an approach is thought to have prevented 40 percent of rural  households from accessing the grid (Prasad & Visagie, 2006). Since consumers  usually pay for their connection to the grid through an additional cost on the tariff,  it is clear that simply pushing for full cost recovery on tariffs will not be a viable  solution to improving energy access, especially among the poor. Energy access  efforts must include targeted subsidies to support both connection fees and  electricity tariffs, for both on-grid and distributed technologies (Africa Progress  Panel, 2015; Deshmukh et al., 2013; Eberhard et al., 2008).  29 Mobile money creates opportunities for novel financing of distributed energy infrastructure as well  as possibilities for improving bill collection, but the exact degree to which access to mobile  money can be advanced across the continent is debated; see for example (McLeod, 2016).  69 Addressing energy poverty  Electricity Subsidies  Electricity subsidies can take a number of different forms. Geographic targeting,  whereby people in a certain area all receive a specific subsidy, is straightforward  to administer, but it allows leakage to the nonpoor as income does not always  correlate neatly with geography. Means testing (or tariff setting based on  household wealth) is more effective for targeting, but it is expensive and time-consuming  to administer because it requires finding a way to continuously  assess household wealth. As with the progressive tariff system mentioned  earlier, subsidies can also be provided based on consumption (Prasad & Visagie,  2006), and again prepaid meters have an advantage in that subsidies can simply  include a basic amount of free electricity each month (Bhattacharyya, 2012).  Consumption-based, or metered, subsidies are thought to be an effective and  cost-effective means of targeting subsidies (once the cost of the meter and its  maintenance are factored in), but they are not useful for energy forms other than  electricity (see below).  It is important to note that unless the issue of last-mile connections is addressed,  any subsidy on electricity consumption will end up benefiting the relatively  wealthy who have been able to get a connection (Eberhard et al., 2008; World  Bank, 2005). In this way, electricity subsidies can be regressive in the same way  that fossil-fuel subsidies have traditionally been (see below). The same can be  said when subsidies are provided only to grid-connected consumers, while tariffs  for mini-grids are negotiated in an unregulated environment with the provider.  Such cases present a bias toward the grid which, given the barriers to  connecting, likely results in a regressive subsidy.  Whatever system of subsidy is considered, the cost of targeting should stay  low—certainly lower than the benefit any household might receive from the  subsidy (Prasad & Visagie, 2006). Beyond subsidies delivered directly to the  consumer, electricity subsidies can also include loans for energy infrastructure at  below-market rates or without conditions or security, tax breaks on components,  state investments in capacity building, removal of import tariffs on electricity  components, and support for capital costs (ARE, n.d.; Bhattacharyya, 2015;  Deshmukh et al., 2013; Prasad & Visagie, 2006).  The desire for the private sector to play a significant role in the delivery of minigrids,  as well as the high cost of energy delivered by these systems, means that  subsidies of some variety are thought to be essential for determining their  scalability, equitability, and long-term viability (Deshmukh et al., 2013; Mostert,  2008; TERI-GNESD, 2014). There may be some low-hanging fruit in this respect  around tariffs and duties. For example, duties cause PV systems to be three  times more expensive in Ghana than they are in Bangladesh and make small  hydropower twice as expensive in African countries as it is in Sri Lanka (ARE,   n.d.). Addressing such issues is a simple way to bring down the costs of capital  on these systems and increase their attractiveness to the private sector.  Despite such potential reforms, however, and regardless of the declining costs of  technology, subsidies for mini-grids may need to be substantial (Bhattacharyya &  Palit, 2016). In Bangladesh, for example, even when all the capital costs of (PVdiesel  hybrid) mini-grids were covered, costs could still not compete with grid  prices (Bhattacharyya, 2015) (see Text Box 4). Thus, for a system to be  sustainable, subsidies might be needed to cover not only capital costs, but also  operation and maintenance costs, as well as the costs of replacing components  in renewable energy systems (Bhattacharyya, 2015; TERI-GNESD, 2014).  Fossil-fuel subsidies  In light of the relatively limited role electricity will play in meeting thermal needs,  there is also a need to discuss fossil-fuel subsidies. Advocates concerned with  climate change and energy access frequently criticize fossil-fuel subsidies (Africa  Progress Panel, 2015), but from an energy poverty perspective, fossil-fuel  subsidies are simply another form of energy subsidy. To this end, some authors  argue that fossil-fuel subsidies have played an important role in advancing the  adoption of modern fuels (kerosene and LPG) in low-income households  (Eberhard et al., 2008).  Despite such gains, the major challenge with fossil-fuel subsidies is that they are  frequently consumed by people who are not poor, and only small proportions of  subsidies end up supporting poor people. The IEA estimates that of the $409  billion in fossil-fuel subsidies that are paid globally, only $35 billion (or 8 percent)  reached the poorest income groups30 (IEA, 2010). Since nonpoor groups use  more energy than poor groups, blanket subsidies on fossil fuels end up benefiting  the wealthy far more than they do the poor—essentially making them highly  regressive (Bacon et al., 2010; Meikle & Bannister, 2003).  Compared with electricity, efforts to target fossil-fuel subsidies have met with  limited success. Fossil fuels can be transported, which allows for theft and black  market sales, and with some tinkering on the internal combustion engine, many  fossil fuels are relatively substitutable. For example, subsidized kerosene—a fuel  used predominantly by the poor and therefore not susceptible to consumption by  wealthy households—has been used to adulterate diesel, which is then used in  far greater quantities by wealthy groups (Bacon et al., 2010). In India, even when  means-testing was used—Indian households had to carry cards qualifying them  to receive subsidized kerosene—the relatively high price of diesel soon saw a  black market develop around kerosene, so that it again entered the automotive  30 These groups are defined as the poorest 20 percent of a country’s population.  71 Addressing energy poverty  sector31 (Bhattacharyya, 2012). Likewise, poor targeting of LPG in India has  resulted in policies benefiting the wealthy, as poor groups could not afford the  appliances necessary to capitalize on the LPG subsidies. In addition people  modified their cars to run on LPG (Bhattacharyya, 2012). Problems of leakage  can be partially addressed by ensuring that subsidies are supported with policies  that allow households to purchase appliances and by dying kerosene blue to  prevent adulteration with diesel (Bhattacharyya, 2012).  Fossil-fuel subsidies can also place a significant strain on the national budget,  especially if fuel prices fluctuate and the fuel is imported. Further complicating  such dynamics is the fact that once fuel subsidies are in place, political pressure  makes them very difficult to remove (Bhattacharyya, 2012).  Overall, it is simple to note that tariffs need to cover costs, but the imperative for  cost recovery should not inhibit people’s access to energy. Implementing  effective tariff structures and subsidies in particular African contexts however will  likely prove extremely challenging. Given that utilities are currently unsustainable,  that grid tariffs are currently high, and that distributed energy tariffs will be even  higher, the challenge of managing the balance between access and sustainability  is significant, especially if one considers the weak economic base of many  African countries. On top of this, the potential for graft is an obvious concern  regarding subsidies—whether they are for fossil fuels or electricity access.  Subsidies therefore need to be accompanied by a strong regulatory environment,  with strong provisions for transparency and accountability, to ensure that they are  fiscally sound (Modi et al., 2006). Any serious policy on energy access needs to  include some account of how to resolve these challenges, based on realistic  appraisals of state capacity, poor people’s current reliance on fossil fuel  subsidies, the imperatives around energy access, and any expected price  changes in electricity generation capacity and energy prices. Finally, if subsidies  are meant to allow people to gain access to energy on a temporary basis until  such access allows them to increase their income to the point that they no longer  need the subsidy, then energy access policies need to include some realistic  account of the likely impacts of energy access on economic development. This  last issue is a point to which the report now turns.  “ELECTRICITY FOR DEVELOPMENT” OR  “ELECTRICITY AND DEVELOPMENT”  Investments in electricity infrastructure have long been justified on the grounds  that they will drive important improvements in economic development. Further to  this, proponents of energy access in particular have argued that improving  access will have more profound impacts on human development than providing  large-scale industries with electricity and hoping that trickle-down economics will  play their part. Hopes that access to electricity will drive local economic  development are also crucial given the challenges around the cost of energy and  the scale of subsidies required, as discussed above. Unless electrification drives  an increase in incomes, and therefore an increase in people’s ability to pay for  modern energy access, electrification efforts may well become unsustainable.  However, as discussed earlier empirical evidence on the impacts of electrification  on economic development has been somewhat ambiguous, showing broad  generalizable impacts in some cases and no noticeable effect in others.  Furthermore, where impacts have been observed they tend to accrue  disproportionately to the wealthy (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016; Prasad & Visagie,  2006; World Bank, 2008) and to women (Dinkelman, 2011). Although it remains  the case that electricity is necessary for the sorts of increased productivity that  characterize rich industrialized (and post-industrialized) economies, access to  electricity is also an insufficient condition for driving economic gains. It seems  that simply providing electricity will not drive the kinds of economic development  that are so desired and so necessary (Khandker et al., 2009b).  To explain the relative lack of economic impacts of electrification, authors have  pointed out that economic development has rarely been included as an explicit  goal of electrification efforts. As such, investment in increasing access to  electricity has usually not been accompanied by policies aimed at driving  economic development (Schillebeeck et al., 2012; Terrapon-Pfaff et al., 2014).  To generate economically viable small businesses, however, households need a  range of other resources beyond electricity. For example, a household that  wished to start up a cottage woodworking industry would find it impossible to do  so without access to the credit required to make investments in heavy-duty  woodworking equipment, regardless of whether it has access to electricity or not.  Likewise, the impact of electricity access on households’ income diversification  will be limited if those households do not get better access to markets through  improved road infrastructure (ARE, n.d.; Practical Action, 2014). Such  considerations are especially important given that the populations most likely to  suffer from poor electricity access are also likely to be remote from other  necessary resources, such as roads, schools, hospitals, and markets (Prasad &  Visagie, 2006).  Thus while the provision of electricity is an important factor shaping development  outcomes, policies aimed at achieving energy access should not assume that  economic development will be an inevitable outcome (Terrapon-Pfaff et al.,  2014). Instead, efforts at improving access to electricity need to be located within  the context of broader development policies and integrated with other supportive  development infrastructure (Schillebeeck et al., 2012). In this respect some  73 Addressing energy poverty  authors have specifically pointed out the need to ensure that efforts to promote  energy access need to be located within the larger context of an energy  transition, which links energy for thermal needs, electricity for lighting, and  electricity for national industry. In this conception, addressing energy poverty  needs to be linked with addressing Africa’s disproportionately small generation  capacity (Sokona et al., 2012).  MODERN VERSUS TRADITIONAL FUELS  Given that access to electricity is unlikely to completely address energy poverty,  particularly for thermal services, it is important to consider how to provide energy  for cooking and heating while reducing the harm caused by the use of  “traditional,” or solid biomass, fuels.  Countries’ efforts in this area have reflected the dominant concerns about the  impacts of solid biomass fuel use on health and the environment (mainly  deforestation), as well as the associated drudgery. The result has been a push to  move individuals up the “energy ladder” and away from such fuels. As  mentioned, much of this focus has fallen on electrification, or encouraging the  use of modern, petroleum-based fuels. Policies on biomass have historically  been neglected (Owen et al., 2013), and where they exist they have been  criticized for being incoherent and disjointed (Zulu & Richardson, 2013). In 2013,  for example, 35 governments in sub-Saharan Africa had strategic targets to  increase access to electricity, 13 had targets related to promotion of modern  fuels (kerosene, LPG, and natural gas), and only 7 had policies related to  improved wood or charcoal stoves (Zulu & Richardson, 2013).  More recently, however, some researchers have come to question the simple  rejection of biomass fuels. New work has made clear that households cannot  easily replace biomass, and its use is in fact expected to increase in sub-  Saharan Africa through 2030 (Malla & Timilsina, 2014). In addition, studies have  revealed that biomass supply chains are extensive. The process of producing,  distributing, and selling charcoal provides a significant number of jobs (see Text  Box 8) (Clancy, 2008; Lambe et al., 2015; Nissing & von Blottnitz, 2010; Owen et  al., 2013) and is a potentially important source of livelihood diversification among  women (Jones et al., 2016) and a social safety-net for rural populations (Zulu &  Richardson, 2013). Such extensive supply chains also mean that wood and  charcoal are readily and reliably available across sub-Saharan Africa in  quantities that suit the income characteristics of poor households (Broto et al.,  2015; Zulu & Richardson, 2013).   Finally, the idea that the collection of biomass drives deforestation has come to  be heavily contested (see Text Box 9), and the impacts on climate have come to  be viewed potentially favorably when compared with improved, petroleum-based  fuels. To this end, some authors have pointed out that while countries in Africa  are generally attempting to reduce their use of biomass, countries such as  Germany are working to increase the use of biomass in grid-scale energy  generation through the use of wood pellets (Owen et al., 2013). Overall, authors  have begun to point out that rather than viewing biomass as a fuel to be avoided,  developing countries should focus on how to best manage biomass in  households in ways that exploit its advantages while limiting its damaging effects.  Text Box 9: Rethinking environmental concerns about biomass  Environmental concerns about the sustainability of biomass as a source of household  energy have their origins in the environmental writings of the 1970s (e.g., Ekholm,  1975), which focused on problems of population growth and forecast that increasing  demand on wood stores would soon decimate forests, with significant impacts for  society (Clancy, 2008). Despite the fact that such predictions clearly did not come to  pass, the narrative they spawned remains common. Some authors and policy makers  Text Box 8: Charcoal and livelihoods  Because of the informal (and sometimes illegal) nature of charcoal supply chains,  their economic impacts are frequently overlooked in policy research. Studies of  biomass supply chains have revealed, however, that they support a significant  number of livelihoods and that the transport, processing, and retail of charcoal are  worth hundreds of millions of dollars annually (Mwampamba et al., 2013a). In  Rwanda, for example, the charcoal sector is estimated to generate $77 million  annually while in Kenya it is estimated to be about $450 million— equivalent to the  country’s tea industry. The story is similar in Tanzania, where charcoal is estimated  to contribute $650 million to the economy—more than 5.8 times the combined value  of tea and coffee production in the country (Zulu & Richardson, 2013).  In terms of jobs, charcoal production in Malawi was estimated to employ 120,000–  140,000 people in 2008. A study from Addis Ababa points out that on a single  market day in 1984, 42,000 suppliers were found to be transporting traditional fuels.  After the government put in place a strategy to limit the use of fuelwood in the city  (which successfully reduced fuelwood use from 70 to 13 percent), that number had  dropped to 3,500 suppliers. Although about 2,000 jobs were thought to be added in  the small business sector through the manufacture of electric, kerosene, and  improved biomass cookstoves, the Ethiopian government was reluctant to  acknowledge the problem of lost livelihoods as a result of a shift away from charcoal  fuelwood as a primary household energy source (Shanko & Rouse, 2005).  75 Addressing energy poverty  still describe the imminent dangers of severe environmental degradation, and even  desertification, as a result of poor households’ reliance on solid biomass for energy  (Owen et al., 2013). This concern has sparked associated worries about the impacts on  water runoff and climate change.  Some contemporary researchers have begun to question this view. Concerns about  fuelwood have largely been dismissed; it has been found that fuelwood is usually  collected from dead trees and its impacts on forest stocks and climate change are  therefore negligible (Bailis et al., 2005; Modi et al., 2006). Concerns about charcoal,  however, remain, as charcoal is produced from forest stock. Charcoal has been  identified as contributing to deforestation (Lewis & Pattanayak, 2012; Malla & Timilsina,  2014; Modi et al., 2006) and driving carbon emissions (Bailis et al., 2005; Bailis et al.,  2015).  However, the exact impact of charcoal collection on forest stocks is also now contested  (Bailis et al., 2015), with numerous studies questioning the link between deforestation  and charcoal production (Mwampamba et al., 2013a). Reviews of the literature looking  at the impacts of charcoal production on deforestation have found that the impact is  both relatively minor and reversible (Chidumayo & Gumbo, 2013; Clancy, 2008; Owen  et al., 2013). In terms of scale, charcoal production is estimated to account for only 2–7  percent of global deforestation (including cases of charcoal production for industrial  use, as in Brazil) (Chidumayo & Gumbo, 2013). More recent analysis notes that only 4  percent of land across the world’s tropics constitutes regions in which the majority of  traditional fuelwood is harvested unsustainably. Within sub-Saharan Africa, the vast  majority of traditional fuelwood is thought to be harvested sustainably (Bailis et al.,  2015).  The impacts of charcoal collection vary across sub-Saharan Africa depending on  particular practices of forest cutting. West Africa is characterized by selective forest  clearing, while in East and southern Africa clear-cutting is prominent (Chidumayo &  Gumbo, 2013). The largest contiguous area of concern is thought to be a particular  swath of East Africa (Eritrea, western Ethiopia, Kenya, Uganda, Rwanda, and Burundi).  Southern Africa contains areas of concern, but none of them large and contiguous  (Bailis et al., 2015).  Even where clear-cutting is taking place, authors note that forest regrowth has been  observed (Mwampamba et al., 2013a; Ribot, 1999) over periods of 9–30 years,  depending on the region (Chidumayo & Gumbo, 2013). How land is managed after  being cleared has been shown to matter more than the fact that land was cleared at all  (Bailis, 2009; Chidumayo & Gumbo, 2013).  Overall, the idea that forest clearance for charcoal production drives deforestation has  come to be questioned. Authors now suggest that its impact seems to more closely  resemble degradation, particularly when compared with other drivers of deforestation,  such as commercial tree felling or the conversion of land for agricultural use  (Chidumayo & Gumbo, 2013; Clancy, 2008).  Charcoal production also raises questions about impact on runoff and climate change.  Impacts on runoff are thought to be quickly undermined by forest regeneration, while  wetland clearance and reservoir construction are thought to have much greater effects   on runoff dynamics than forest clearance for charcoal production (Chidumayo &  Gumbo, 2013). With regard to climate change, carbon that is released in charcoal  burning is thought to be eventually sequestered in new forest growth (Chidumayo &  Gumbo, 2013). Even at these lower levels, though, the impacts of traditional fuel use  can generate relatively large proportions of the carbon emissions produced in countries  with few industrial emissions (Bailis et al., 2015). Thus, efforts to reduce emissions by  promoting and using improved cookstoves remain important.  While felling trees for charcoal use is thought to have only local and temporary effects,  kiln sites have been found to have more permanent effects owing to the high  temperatures that permanently damage soils. Although kiln sites are relatively small,  forest recovery in such sites is limited, because forests do not recover in the medium  term but are replaced instead by shrubby plant species (Chidumayo & Gumbo, 2013).  Among the damaging effects of traditional biomass, none is more severe than the  impact on people’s health. Further, while the impacts on deforestation may be  limited and time bound (see Text Box 9), forest clearance still temporarily  undermines access to forest services, while the drudgery of collecting fuelwood  represents a welfare cost to the women and children to whom this task frequently  falls. Moreover, in the future increased demand from growing urban centers may  weaken the sustainability of this practice. This is especially the case in semi-arid  areas, where the relative impacts of charcoal production on forest cover change  may be greater than those of land clearance for agricultural purposes (Sedano et  al., 2016). Under such circumstances, even if forest degradation is temporary,  combustion of biomass produces carbon immediately while regrowth takes time.  Under conditions of increased future demand, this will result in increases in the  total carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. Efforts to promote improved cookstoves,  which might serve to limit these pressures are, therefore, crucial.  As mentioned earlier, efforts on this front have been bolstered by the creation of  the Global Alliance for Clean Cookstoves (Africa Progress Panel, 2015;  Agbemabiese et al., 2012; Practical Action, 2014), which has a goal of providing  100 million cookstoves by 2020. Considering that there are expected to be 3  billion people in rural Africa and Asia by that time, the Alliance for Clean  Cookstoves will reach only about 16 percent of the needy population (assuming 5  people per household) (Bhattacharyya, 2012). This suggests that although the  current focus on cookstoves is an improvement on historical neglect, there is a  need to put even greater resources into the project.  Although there is a strong case for acknowledging the extent to which the supply  chains around solid biomass support livelihoods, such supply chains are thought  to be characterized by high levels of inequality. Middlemen and wholesalers are  able to capture most of the value, while individuals involved in production and  retail are relatively exploited (Zulu & Richardson, 2013). Efforts to support the  creation of inclusive and sustainable supply chains for solid biomass are  therefore an essential element of any energy access effort.  77 Addressing energy poverty  Finally, regardless of the benefits of improved cookstoves, the use of solid  biomass for cooking will result in excessive drudgery and unacceptable health  impacts, most of which will be borne by women, who are usually responsible for  these tasks. Although it is unclear exactly how to address these problems, a  concerted effort needs to be dedicated to solving such problems, while  acknowledging the likely persistence of solid biomass fuels in the home.  Overall, considering the question of modern versus traditional fuels, the intention  here is not to promote a single fuel or approach over another. Instead it is to  point out that different fuels have different impacts involving complicated tradeoffs.  Petroleum-based fuels are more efficient and have important health  advantages over solid biomass, but they also drive climate change (Alstone et  al., 2015; Bailis et al., 2005; Clancy, 2008) and have made only limited inroads  into the household energy economies of the poor. On the other hand, biomass  fuels provide important access to energy and sustain livelihoods. The use of  traditional fuels is also not simply going to go away. In sub-Saharan Africa, the  number of people reliant on biomass fuels is expected to increase between 2014  and 2030 from 793 million people to 823 million (IEA, 2016). As such, a simple  view that treats biomass as a “traditional” or “backward” fuel, with no place in  development policy will undermine efforts to address energy poverty.  Any serious policy aimed at addressing energy poverty needs to engage with the  complexity of factors determining how households choose their fuels. This will  need to include an explicit focus on the role of biomass in households. Important  dimensions of such policy will include the promotion of improved cookstoves,  including standards for their construction, tax incentives for their manufacture,  subsidies and credit systems to support their purchase, awareness raising about  their value, and investments in the infrastructure needed for their manufacture  (such as electricity) and their supply (such as roads) (Agbemabiese et al., 2012).  Likewise, policies will need to include plans for community-based sustainable  forest management, and the creation of policies that ensure the effective  distribution of wealth within the charcoal value chain (Clancy, 2008). Finally,  efforts that seek to improve the efficiency of charcoal use or provide effective  biomass substitutes, such as briqueting, can also play a role in alleviating the  impacts of degradation or address concerns in cases where charcoal production  is unsustainable (Mwampamba et al., 2013b).  FINANCING  It is clear that finding the financing to tackle energy poverty will be a major  challenge. This financing will need to cover increased generation capacity,  upgrades to the grid, connection fees, and subsidies both to cover basic energy  consumption and to reduce the barriers to the private sector. Looking at universal   energy access alone, reports suggest costs of the order of $17–$24 billion  annually (Africa Progress Panel, 2015; IEA, 2012; IEG, n.d.). About 65 percent of  that money is needed to support new generation, and approximately 25 percent  is needed for transmission and distribution (IEG, n.d.). In addition, an estimated  $3.8 billion per year is required to achieve universal access to clean cooking  facilities (IEA, 2012). On top of this an estimated $20–$35 billion needs to be  invested annually in plants (67 percent) and transmission and distribution (23  percent) to meet current and future demand in Africa (Africa Progress Panel,  2015; IEG, n.d.). These large sums of money dwarf current investment in the  sector: about $8 billion annually (Africa Progress Panel, 2015). The picture looks  worse in in countries with low levels of energy access, where public and private  investments have been only about $3.6 billion annually (IEG, n.d.).  Figure 8: Comparing required annual financing for electricity infrastructure  in Africa with current financing  Source: Africa Progress Panel, 2015; IEG, n.d.; World Bank Group, 2012.  It is unlikely that the international financial institutions will be able to solve this  financing challenge alone. Consider that between 2000 and 2014 annual  investments in energy from the World Bank Group were around $1.5 billion  annually, with most of that money going to countries with relatively high levels of  energy access and being invested mainly in improving the quality, reliability, and  efficiency of supply to already connected consumers (IEG, n.d.). Countries with  low levels of electricity access received disproportionately small investments,  attracting only 8 percent of total investment in generation capacity (in terms  increasing GW capacity), 7 percent of investment in connections, and 3 percent  of T&D network investments. World Bank projects lasted around nine years on  average. Unless something changes on this front, countries will only receive a  little over two project cycles before 2030, meaning that energy access goals are  unlikely to be met (IEG, n.d.).  The possibilities for official development assistance (ODA) are expected to be  similarly limited. ODA has stagnated since 2011, and while estimates for  financing Africa’s infrastructure needs are estimated at around $93 billion, total  aid to the continent is about half that, with only around $18 billion being available  for infrastructure investment (Africa Progress Panel, 2015).  Despite these challenges, however, the financing problem for energy  infrastructure may well be surmountable. African domestic taxes are thought to  be able to cover about half the financing gap for electricity infrastructure. On top  of this, Africa is estimated to spend about $21 billion on poorly targeted fossil-fuel  subsidies every year (though most of this is dominated by spending in North  Africa, with South Africa, Nigeria, and Angola being the only sub-Saharan  countries paying significant subsidies (IEA, 2011)). The continent is also  estimated to lose around $69 billion annually through illicit financial flows.  Finally, while holding out hope for ODA might be a limited option, it should be  noted that if rich countries met their longstanding goal of contributing 0.7 percent  of GDP to ODA, this would free up an estimated $178 billion in extra financing for  Africa (Africa Progress Panel, 2015).  Given these conditions, the challenge of mobilizing finance for investments in  energy infrastructure is believed to be one of the principal barriers to achieving  universal energy access (Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016). Solving this problem will  likely require using public finances to leverage private finance and generating  policies that create a conducive environment for private investment (Africa  Progress Panel, 2015; Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016). Important channels for  public expenditure will be investments in increasing the efficiency of the grid  (Eberhard et al., 2008) and subsidizing last-mile connections and basic electricity  consumption (Bhattacharyya, 2015; Bhattacharyya & Palit, 2016; Deshmukh et  al., 2013). Policies will need to focus on reducing taxes, tariffs, and import costs  on renewable energy components, supporting the creation of supply chains for  distributed renewable energy technology, and reducing uncertainty around the  expansion of the grid (see below).  On top of financial support, there is a need to increase access to credit (to both  consumers and local entrepreneurs) through efforts at financial inclusion and  increase the periods over which loans can be paid back (Africa Progress Panel,  2015; Turman-Bryant et al., 2015). Efforts in this regard should pay particular  attention to the new financing possibilities being created as a result of new  technologies such as cellphones and mobile money (Alstone et al., 2015).   7. CONCLUSIONS AND WAYS  FORWARD  With a clear sense of the nature of energy poverty, and the opportunities for  improving energy access via different technologies and approaches, the report  moves to consider the important ways forward for energy policy in countries with  low levels of energy access. Overall the emphasis should fall on (1) leveraging  financing, (2) reforming institutions, (3) addressing the challenge of solid  biomass, (4) making explicit plans for grid expansion and distributed energy  integration, (5) balancing different generation technologies and approaches to  access, (6) supporting the whole supply chain across generation technologies,  and (7) placing efforts at electrification within broader development strategies.  FOCUS ON THE FINANCING  Financing presents a fundamental challenge for addressing energy poverty in  sub-Saharan Africa. Public finance will not be able to cover these costs and thus  it is imperative that public finances, along with donor and non-governmental  support, be dedicated towards efforts that leverage private finance in the sector.  At the same time, it is imperative that opportunities for increasing public finance  must be pursued by reducing wasteful and regressive expenditures and  addressing illicit financial flows. Public and donor support should go toward  reducing taxes, tariffs, and import costs on renewable energy components;  undertaking resource assessments; subsidizing basic electricity allowances and  connection fees; and creating and supporting institutions focused on promoting  learning around new technologies.  To help promote investment in technologies that increase energy access, it will  be important to develop policies that reduce risk for private investors, such as  making grid expansion plans transparent, and to create institutes to train the  relevant technicians. Finally, there is a need to promote financial inclusion and  increase access to credit for both potential consumers and local entrepreneurs.  Despite these opportunities for improving financing, in very low-income countries  it will likely be exceptionally challenging to find the finances to ensure that lowincome  groups can gain access to electricity and shift their cooking to improved  cookstoves. Appreciating the scale of this challenge is central to generating  realistic efforts to tackle it.  81 Addressing energy poverty  FOCUS ON INSTITUTIONS  Recent advances in renewable technologies have created new possibilities to  advance energy access at a rate and cost that would not be possible if grid  expansion was the only option available. Important as such advances are,  however, they create a risk that advocates will focus solely on the technology  and overlook the importance of the institutional context in which that technology  is being delivered. In particular, there is a risk of believing that distributed  technologies can simply be provided by the private sector and that challenges  associated with unresponsive and corrupt utilities are no longer an issue.  To reduce this risk, it is worth keeping in mind that distributed energy  technologies are not all new and neither are efforts at improving energy access  (Agbemabiese et al., 2012; Sokona et al., 2012). For example, straightforward  technologies such as windmills have long been promoted in Africa as a means to  provide power for irrigation without resounding success (Sokona et al., 2012).  Likewise, diesel generators have long been able to provide electricity at prices  comparable with what is currently possible using solely PV systems  (Bhattacharyya, 2015) and with much lower up-front costs (World Bank & IEA,  2015), and yet the private sector has not simply capitalized on the latent demand  and provided electricity via mini-grids.  To this end, the literature on energy access repeatedly observes how “weak  institutional structures and organizational systems contribute to the poor  performance of projects.… economically viable projects can fail simply because  of an inadequate appreciation of the importance of appropriate organisational  structures and institutional arrangements. Past experiences also show that a  large number of off-grid electrification projects have had limited success…  because of the disproportionate focus on technical installation without adequate  attention to the long-term sustainability of the projects” (TERI-GNESD, 2014, p.  26). As mentioned above, “no electrification project has ever succeeded without  significant government backing and strong political will” (Schillebeeck et al.,  2012, p. 7), and achieving countrywide rural electrification through the efforts of  small-scale private companies alone is impossible (Mostert, 2008, p. 12). As  such, policy and regulatory environments will matter, as will financial support to  enable supply chains and cover subsidies. The public sector will therefore remain  a crucial part of this process, with the utility likely playing a central role.  There is, therefore, an absolute need to maintain core advocacy work on creating  public energy institutions that are responsive and accountable. It would be an  error, for example, to assume that the private sector can resolve the challenge of  energy access and that debates over the privatization of state utilities can now be  neglected. If this occurs, the ongoing failure of power sector reform to benefit the  poor is likely to continue (Prasad & Visagie, 2006). Further, given the role of  subsidies and the scale of tenders that will likely be involved in increasing energy   access, the scope for misuse of funds is significant. Given that utilities are  already cited as sites of patronage in Africa, the focus on energy access could  well result in a greater need to ensure institutional accountability.  A note of caution on this front is that the political and economic dynamics  shaping institutional responsiveness might be more complex than is often  portrayed in the literature on good governance and institutions. For example,  efforts that have sought to explain energy access by looking at governance  metrics and corruption indicators have been found to lack any power when it  comes to explaining electrification rates across countries (Wolfram et al., 2012).  Such findings mirror a larger trend in the development literature toward  questioning the relationship between both democracy and governance, and  human development outcomes (Nelson, 2007; Ross, 2006; Truex, 2015).  Findings such as these point to the need for institutional reforms to go beyond  cookie-cutter approaches to improving governance and engage with nuanced  accounts of power and political economy analysis when seeking to drive  improved institutional responsiveness. See Text Box 6 for an example of how  these complex processes play out.  DO NOT NEGLECT TRADITIONAL FUELS  Although electricity is a unique source of energy that creates unique  opportunities for improving people’s standard of living, the empirical evidence is  clear: use of solid fuels will remain prevalent regardless of whether households  are connected to electricity and regardless of whether they are connected via the  grid or distributed energy sources. The use of biomass is actually expected to  increase, not decrease, in sub-Saharan Africa (Malla & Timilsina, 2014). Since as  much as 90 percent of household energy needs come from cooking and heating  (Bhattacharyya, 2012), any serious policy on energy poverty needs to dedicate  significant effort to ensuring that such needs can be met safely and sustainably.  Policies must account for managing the use and collection of solid biomass  rather than simply trying to replace such fuels and ignoring the conditions of their  use. To this end the challenges and opportunities around promoting petroleum-based  fuels, such as kerosene and LPG, need to be weighed against the  challenges and opportunities of meeting energy needs through solid biomass  fuels such as fuelwood and charcoal.  In terms of charcoal and fuelwood, policies need to focus on creating standards  for, and ensuring access to, improved cookstoves. While the creation of the  Global Alliance on Clean Cookstoves represents important progress on this front,  given the scale of the challenge of energy poverty, it is clear that still more needs  to be done (Bhattacharyya, 2012). Efforts in this respect include removing taxes  and duties on imported cookstove technologies, raising awareness about the  83 Addressing energy poverty  benefits of using improved cookstoves, creating access to capital for private-sector  cookstove development and purchase, and ensuring that likely users of  improved cookstoves are engaged throughout the design, manufacture, and  retail process to ensure that cookstoves are culturally appropriate and support  local poverty alleviation efforts (Lambe et al., 2015). On top of such actions, as  with electricity access, efforts around cookstoves need to be supported by the  larger infrastructural context so that, for example, roads exist to allow for stoves  to be distributed and grid electricity is cheap and sustainable to allow for stoves  to be manufactured affordably (Agbemabiese et al., 2012).  In addition to promoting improved cookstoves, efforts should be directed toward  encouraging the appropriate drying and storage of fuelwood as well as the  soaking of grains to reduce cooking times (Modi et al., 2006). Finally, policy  needs to focus on creating the conditions for the sustainable harvesting of fuels.  To this end, much can be done to improve efficiency of charcoal kilns (Bailis et  al., 2005). Likewise community management of forests and acknowledgment of  the importance of fuelwood and charcoal production as forms of employment will  be central to ensuring sustainability and poverty reduction. Calls for biomass  collection to be made illegal should be resisted, as this tends only to result in  elicit transactions that are likely to undermine sustainable management (Clancy,  2006). Supply chains for both biomass fuels and cookstoves should be made  more equal and less exploitative. Policy could also play a role in increasing  access to solid fuels by creating fuel depots, which can reduce drudgery, lower  costs, and ensure the sustainable supply of solid biomass (Modi et al., 2006).  Focusing on biomass fuels does not mean excluding attention to improved,  petroleum-based fuels or the uptake of electricity for cooking. The push for clean  cookstoves is not an end in itself, but rather an important interim measure that  can improve health, reduce drudgery, maintain access to forest services, and  mitigate the emission of greenhouse gasses as well as other pollutants, while  access to modern fuels is achieved. It is thus also important to promote the use  of modern fuels; encourage the use of, and create finance for, low-cost  appliances; address bottlenecks in the supply chain of modern fuels; ensure that  fuels are available in small quantities; and ensure that transport infrastructure is  in place to support supply chains (Modi et al., 2006). A focus on education,  especially among women, is also a key way to ensure that households’ fuel use  is rational and not simply determined by the low opportunity cost of women’s  time. In addition, countries need to carefully weigh their support for fossil-fuel  subsidies; they may have been effective in driving the uptake of improved fuels,  but they are highly inefficient and regressive owing to problems with targeting  and leakage.  Finally, complementary actions can be taken to reduce the risks associated with  kerosene, including setting standards that prevent it from being resold in drink  containers, dying kerosene a color so that it does not look like water, and using   childproof caps on containers, which has been shown to significantly reduce  unintentional poisoning32 (Meyer et al., 2007; Tshiamo, 2009). Some of the risks  associated with energy poverty, such as fire risk, are located in larger social  contexts associated with substance abuse, land tenure, and urban planning  (Morrissey & Taylor, 2006). In South Africa, for example, despite improvements  in both energy access and the availability of spill-proof kerosene stoves, the  number of informal settlement fires has continued to rise (Kimemia et al., 2014).  Efforts to address energy poverty therefore need to be rationally located within a  larger policy environment that addresses these larger developmental challenges  as well.  ADDRESS UNCERTAINTY AROUND GRID  EXPANSION  Debates about the merits of centralized, on-grid approaches versus distributed  energy technologies for addressing energy poverty are overstated. Both  strategies will need to be deployed simultaneously. Electricity will best be  introduced to most rural households through distributed technologies, but this will  likely be a temporary solution. The eventual goal should be grid expansion, which  will achieve the lowest cost of electricity for any household and allow for high  rates of renewable energy penetration (see Text Box 3).  As a result, it is essential that plans for grid rollout are transparent and that the  government sticks to those plans. This sort of certainty will be necessary for the  private sector to invest in distributed energy technology. Given that plans for grid  rollout can involve time scales of 25 years (Eberhard et al., 2008), staying the  course on policies made today will involve resisting intense political pressure to  change those plans and connect certain constituencies. To this end, an effective  means for planning the rollout of the grid is on the basis of least-cost. Also  needed are policies that detail what will happen when grid expansion meets  privately owned, distributed generation projects that have not yet recovered their  costs and generated a return on capital.  MIX TECHNOLOGIES FOR ACCESS  In balancing expansion of the grid with distributed energy technologies, as well  as identifying roles for the state, the private sector, and community-led efforts,  every country context will be unique. This context will depend on factors such as  32 Certain graphics, such as the skull and crossbones on kerosene containers, have actually been  discouraged by the US National Committee for Injury Prevention and Control because they  have been shown to attract children rather than deter them (Meyer et al., 2007).  85 Addressing energy poverty  the size of the economy, the distribution of the population (and the distribution of  wealth across the population), the nature of the terrain, the availability of different  energy sources and fuels, and the current quality of infrastructure. Despite such  variation, in general, decisions on technologies should include the following  principles:  1. Policies should be in place to connect “under the grid” populations and be  complemented by polices to ensure that there is sufficient generation  capacity to meet the extra demand. Such policies need to consider the  particular challenges faced by the urban poor; economic trickle-down will not  automatically meet these groups’ needs (Clancy, 2006), especially when  connection problems stem from their interaction with compromised access to  serviceable land.  2. Income density will be an important guide to determining where grid  expansion should be a priority. The grid should be expanded to areas where  its considerable economies of scale can be exploited.  3. Where incomes densities are relatively high yet population centers are  remote, mini-grids will be the best solution. They will provide the cheapest  form of energy with the additional possibility of being scaled up to meet future  growth in demand.  4. Where remote populations are scattered into small homesteads, SHSs will  likely be the best choice.  5. Among very poor households, solar appliances might be the best option.  Policies to support this should focus on awareness raising, the removal of  taxes and tariffs on solar appliances, and creation of product quality  verification standards (Turman-Bryant et al., 2015).  6. Plans to expand energy access through biodigesters should be modest given  the barriers experienced in other countries when it comes to effectively  integrating them into household energy consumption.  Efforts at grid expansion are likely best undertaken by a centralized state body  owing to the fact that the grid represents an almost prefect monopoly. Beyond  grid expansion, a mix of private and public approaches can productively generate  and sell electricity. Likewise, the provision of distributed energy technology can  take place through a variety of hybrid arrangements involving the state and the  private sector (Mostert, 2008). Establishing a dedicated government department,  focused on increasing energy access, within the utility has proven useful in cases  where access to electricity has been successfully expanded33 (Eberhard et al.,  2008). In all cases, policies aimed at achieving energy access should include  33 It should be noted that having such a dedicated body does not always result in improved energy  access.   provisions for flexibility so that it is possible to learn from successes and amend  policies as new problems arise. The process by which Africa is electrified will not  parallel experiences from other countries. With few blueprints for best practices,  learning must be a central feature of policy.  SUPPORT THE WHOLE DISTRIBUTED ENERGY  SUPPLY CHAIN (NOT JUST UP-FRONT COSTS)  As mentioned, the state and the utility will likely matter a great deal in efforts to  increase energy access and address energy poverty—even for distributed  energy technologies. Policies should focus not only on addressing challenges  related to the costs of generation, storage, and distribution, but also on the entire  supply chain. This will include creating institutions that train technicians,  installers, construction staff, economists, and engineers (Modi et al., 2006;  Mostert, 2008). It will require ensuring that parts for servicing and replacement  are available and affordable, undertaking resource assessments, and creating  institutions for financing for both entrepreneurs and consumers. Without such  conditions in place, projects are likely to prove unsustainable (Terrapon-Pfaff et  al., 2014) and the subsidies covering initial capital costs could well be wasted as  projects fail or are abandoned.  Because distributed renewable energy technologies are new, the state will also  play an important role in overcoming first-generation technology barriers.  Activities will include providing data and promoting learning about the creation of  effective supply chains and viable business models (Bhattacharyya & Palit,  2016).  PLACE ELECTRICITY ACCESS WITHIN THE  BROADER CONTEXT OF DEVELOPMENT  Although access to abundant energy is clearly a precondition for the levels of  economic productivity and well-being experienced in industrial and post-industrial  economies, simply providing households with electricity is unlikely, by itself, to  drive the large development outcomes that are possible. As such, while  improving electricity access is an important development imperative in and of  itself, it must be conceived of within a broader development agenda that focuses  on the provision of other infrastructure such as roads, markets, and sanitation,  and the availability of other services such as credit, education, health, and  policing. In this respect it will be important to integrate energy poverty alleviation  into efforts to close the energy gap in sub-Saharan Africa. Such a large-scale  integration of development efforts is challenging because it will involve many  87 Addressing energy poverty  different government departments and ministries, but this integrated planning is  likely to be necessary to realize the development opportunities made possible by  electrification.  