 Thursday, February 27, 2014  Financial Times (FT.com) • 314 words
  Lord Deben's sharp words for Australia's approach to climate change 
 By Pilita Clark in London 

 The Abbott government's move  to abandon the carbon tax and other climate measures has been contentious within Australia but few critics from outside the country have been as outspoken as Lord Deben.  The peer also chairs the UK's Committee on Climate Change, an older version of Australia's Climate Change Authority, which the Abbott government is planning to axe as part of its repeal of the carbon tax.  Lord Deben said he had discussed climate change at length with Mr Abbott before last year's Australian election, "and I got five different views during that period of time".  He said he had a similar conversation with Mr Abbott's mentor, former Australian prime minister John Howard, whom he said was also "absolutely unscientific about it", and appeared to have read only one book on the subject, by the former UK chancellor Lord Lawson, who says there is great uncertainty about the potential risk of climate change.  "I have high hopes that people in Australia will recognise that the rest of the world is going in the opposite direction," said Lord Deben, adding that not every Abbott government minister shared Mr Abbott's views.  "It's a joy to go and listen to some others, like [communications minister] Malcolm Turnbull who clearly seems to take a more sensible view," he said.  Mr Turnbull lost the leadership of the Australian Liberal party to Mr Abbott in 2009 after backing a climate change measure from the then Labor party government that many in his party opposed.  Since coming to power last September, the Abbott government has said it will repeal Australia's carbon tax and abolish bodies such as the Climate Change Authority and the Clean Energy Finance Corporation, which encourages investment in renewable energy schemes.  Last week, the government appointed an industrialist to review the country's renewable energy target, Dick Warburton, who says he is sceptical that man-made carbon dioxide is the main cause of global warming.  If the government succeeds in getting parliamentary support for repealing existing climate laws, it plans to introduce the Direct Action plan to reduce greenhouse gas emissions by 5 per cent from 2000 levels by 2020.  At the heart of the idea is a fund that would be used to pay for emissions reduction programmes done at the lowest cost.    