

Tuesday, March 11, 2014

Financial Times (FT.com) • 627 words

Climate chief warns battle to curb
warming is becoming harder

By Pilita Clark, Environment Correspondent



The struggle to curb global warming is becoming increasingly fraught and costly, the head of the world's leading climate science authority has warned.

"We will have to work much harder to win this battle now than we would have been required to do 10 or 15 years ago," Rajendra Pachauri, chairman of the UN's Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, told the FT in an interview.

Speaking in London, Dr Pachauri said he was still optimistic the world would find a way of curbing the man-made greenhouse gas emissions that scientists say are warming the planet to potentially dangerous levels.

"The challenge is daunting but I don't for a moment feel pessimistic," he said, explaining there were many examples of technical advances and political actions underway to combat the problem.

The IPCC was set up in 1988 to give governments an expert assessment of how the climate is changing, and why. It will release the latest section of its fifth lengthy report at the end of this month.

Each of its assessments has confirmed what it says is unequivocal warming, caused largely by emissions of carbon dioxide, the main man-made greenhouse gas, produced by burning fossil fuels such as coal and gas.

However, carbon emissions have kept steadily increasing over the lifetime of the IPCC and last year rose to more than 400 parts per million, the highest level in millions of years.

Average global temperatures have already risen 0.85C over the past century, and governments have agreed this rise should not exceed 2C, though there is evidence that even 1.5C of warming could be risky.

Sea levels have also risen and Arctic summer sea ice has retreated faster than many scientists were predicting only a few years ago. Meanwhile, there is evidence that heatwaves are increasing in intensity in some parts of the world, along with heavy rainfalls.

The IPCC's new report is expected to confirm that the cost of containing climate change will rise the longer governments wait to reduce emissions.

Dr Pachauri said: "We will be looking at the costs of mitigation in next month's report but in our last report in 2007, we said if you want to stabilise temperature increases to no more than 2C - 2.4C at the least cost, then 2015 is the year when C02 emissions will need to peak."

The world's governments have made two big attempts to come up with a global agreement on cutting greenhouse gas emissions in the past 17 years.

The first was the 1997 Kyoto protocol, a treaty that was supposed to lead wealthy countries to cut their emissions by about 5 per cent from 1990 levels.

It has been seen as a failure because the US, then the world's largest emitter, failed to ratify it and large developing countries such as China, now the biggest emitter, were never bound by it.

The second push came in 2009 at a meeting of world leaders in Copenhagen that was supposed to come up with a new deal but instead ended acrimoniously after failing to produce a stringent, binding agreement.

Governments are now negotiating a new binding treaty that is due to be agreed at the end of next year [2015] in Paris, and take effect from 2020.

There are already concerns that this attempt will also founder.

However, the head of the UN body that organises the negotiations, Christiana Figueres, said in London this week there was evidence governments now trusted each other to act far more than they did in 2009 at Copenhagen, especially China and the US.

"I am very hopeful about the US-China conversation and confident that both will be leaders in the agreement," she said, pointing out Washington and Beijing had been holding their own talks about boosting co-operation on climate change.

In addition, each has been taking domestic action to curb emissions. China has said it will rein in emissions from coal-fired power plants that are contributing to dangerous levels of air pollution, and has also launched pilot carbon markets.

The Obama administration has taken steps to regulate coal plant emissions.

In addition, Ms Figueres said a report this month by the Globe International legislators group found nearly 500 climate laws have now been passed in countries around the world, up from fewer than 100 in 2002 and under 40 in 1997.

Among 66 nations accounting for almost 90 per cent of global emissions, eight passed key climate legislation last year, while another 19 made what Globe called "positive advances".

However some countries, notably Australia, had taken steps to repeal existing climate laws and the combined sum of governments' actions so far is unlikely to halt rising emissions soon.
