

Financial Times (web site)
Friday, March 5, 2021 - Z 761 mots

Watchdog asked to examine potential Drax conﬂict on
climate advisory arm

Camilla Hodgson

The environment adviser to former UK prime minister Theresa May has asked the government watchdog to
examine a potential conﬂict of interest involving the head of climate change at power group Drax, who is also
a member of the UK's prestigious climate advisory committee.

Lord Randall has asked the National Audit Ofﬁce to consider a formal investigation into the positions held by
Rebecca Heaton, the Drax executive who is also a member of the Committee on Climate Change   which
advises the government.

Heaton has been on the committee since 2017, when her appointment drew criticism from climate activists.
The issue has now been raised by Randall as Drax attempts to realign its business to focus on an emerging
technology, known as bioenergy with carbon capture and storage (Beccs).

The CCC has identiﬁed the technology as a potential solution for managing the most difﬁcult aspects of
avoiding carbon emissions. Drax has said its development will require government ﬁnancial support.

"Given the signiﬁcant commercial interests of her employer, Drax, in the policies on which these committees
are advising government, I believe that there may be a real or perceived conﬂict between her role with Drax
and her ability to offer impartial expert advice on such policies," wrote Randall in a letter to the NAO.

Heaton is also a member of the CCC's audit committee, which advises the group on its own governance, and
a   council   member   of   the   Natural   Environment   Research   Council,   which   is   the   leading   funder   of   UK
environmental science, including research into carbon capture technologies.

Randall said the NAO should examine whether Heaton's roles allowed Drax to gain "an unfair commercial
advantage through the inﬂuence its employee may be having on the advice and formulation of policy in an
area in which Drax operates".

Drax is one of the world's largest producers of biomass, material including wood pellets and other plant
matter, which is burnt to generate energy. Its biomass operations are reliant on UK government subsidies
due to end in 2027. The company is working to reduce costs so that these operations remain viable, and also
betting on the Beccs technology, which involves capturing and storing the carbon emissions generated by
burning the biomass.

Using Beccs, "we expect to play a major role in delivering the UK's legally binding objective to achieve net
zero carbon emissions by 2050 and support global efforts to reduce carbon emissions," Drax said in its 2020
annual results, adding that the CCC had indicated "a growing commitment to" the technology.

Deploying Beccs at scale will require an "investment framework" from the government, Drax states on its
website.

The government has pledged up to £1bn to support the development of a carbon capture sector, which
could include new Beccs subsidies.

Phil MacDonald, chief executive of Ember, a climate and energy think-tank, said Drax was "hunting for their
next big subsidy and Beccs is going to be important for that".

In its latest carbon budget - or advice to government about the volume of greenhouse gases the UK can
emit over a ﬁve-year period - the CCC said technologies such as Beccs "will be required to permanently
remove carbon from the atmosphere, in order to offset remaining residual emissions in the UK and achieve
net zero by 2050".

The nascent technology could be used to sequester 45m-95m tonnes of CO2 every year by 2050, said the
report. That compares to an estimate of 43m tonnes a year outlined in the ﬁfth carbon budget, which placed

 





less emphasis on Beccs and was published before Heaton joined the CCC.


The CCC's most recent sixth carbon budget published in December also stated that the UK "has plans to
deploy large-scale carbon removal through Beccs over the 2020s and beyond," citing Drax's plans.

Randall said the NAO should question whether the CCC's most recent advice on greenhouse gas removal
technology could be "considered to be impartial and in the public interest".

Chris Stark, chief executive of the CCC, said: "Heaton was appointed by ministers in 2017 to provide a business
voice on the committee." He said she "stands back from committee discussions on bioenergy" and was
"excluded from all relevant discussions on bioenergy and bioenergy with carbon capture and storage" in its
deliberation for the sixth carbon budget.

The government assessed the CCC's processes for managing conﬂicts of interest in 2019 and found it to be
"robust", he added.

Drax said: "Dr Rebecca Heaton does not advise the CCC on bioenergy - this ensures there is no conﬂict of
interest."




 


