

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
Business/Financial, Tuesday, March 2, 2021 485 mots, p. B 5

White House Says Trade Policy Will Focus on Workers,
Climate, Racial Gaps and Supply Chain

The Biden administration said Monday that it would try to use its trade policy to support American workers,
mitigate climate change, close racial gaps, make supply chains more resilient and expand opportunities for
American exporters.

In a report laying out its trade policy agenda for 2021, the administration said trade would be an essential
component of ﬁghting the pandemic, buoying the economy and enacting President Biden's "Build Back
Better" agenda, which aims to strengthen U.S. infrastructure and innovation and close racial and economic
gaps. The administration said it would particularly focus on developing more resilient manufacturing supply
chains in the year to come to help the country better confront health crises.

The report, issued by the Ofﬁce of the United States Trade Representative, said that promoting open markets
would   remain   a   fundamental   part   of   U.S.   policy   but   that   efforts   to   lower   foreign   barriers   for   American
exporters would be considered in tandem with the interests of American "manufacturers, farmers, ranchers,
ﬁshers and underserved communities."

The administration also said it would review past trade policies for any "unintended consequences" for
workers, including effects on wage gaps, worker unionization, the safety of workplaces and the presence of
forced labor. And it pledged to try to better understand the impact of trade policies on communities of color
and the empowerment of women.

In a criticism of the Trump administration, the report said American agriculturalists had been burdened in
recent years "by erratic trade actions that were taken without a broader strategy" that triggered retaliation,
billions of dollars in lost exports and huge government payments to farmers.

The   report   also   said   the   Biden   administration   would   develop   a   more   comprehensive   and   systematic
approach to dealing with China "than the piecemeal approach of the recent past."

It promised to aggressively pursue unfair trade practices from China, "using all available tools" to take on
behavior that harms American workers and businesses. But the report provided few details on the concrete
policy tools the administration would use, saying that ofﬁcials were carrying out a comprehensive review of
U.S. trade policy as they develop an overall China strategy.

The administration also pledged to make addressing China's human rights abuses against Uighurs and
other minorities in the Xinjiang region a top priority, and said it would work with allied countries to try to
address global market distortions created by Chinese overcapacity in sectors like steel, aluminum, solar and
ﬁber optics.

The Biden administration said it would engage with allies on issues like how trade policies can affect climate
change, build stronger supply chains and end unfair trade practices, among other goals. And it pledged to
work with the new director general of the World Trade Organization, Ngozi Okonjo-Iweala, "to address the
challenges   facing   the   global   trading   system,   including   growing   inequality,   digital   transformation,   and
impediments to small business trade."



 


