 Business, Tuesday, December 21, 2021 682 mots, p. 32  North Sea oil rules will ruin UK's energy independence  'Climate change compatibility checkpoint' will not open the way to new fields. It is another nail in the coffin of the sector's security Ben Marlow  Whatever you think about this Government, it has become a world leader in saying one thing and doing another: lockdown by stealth; covert cheese-andwine parties while the rest of us stay at home or are prevented from seeing loved ones; and now the latest thing - a gutless plan to wind down the North Sea oil industry and another nail in the coffin of what remains of UK energy security.  As if that were not bad enough, Greg Hands, the energy minister, is attempting to dress the whole thing up as a climate-friendly scheme to help the sector with some nonsense about how it is evidence that the Government remains pro-oil and gas. You couldn't make this stuff up.  The clue is in the name: a "climate change compatibility checkpoint" that all new applications to explore for fossil fuels in the North Sea will be subjected to before approval is, or isn't, granted. How this will "open the door" to a flurry of new fields being developed, as Mr Hands protests, is anyone's guess.  If the Government doesn't want further development in the North Sea then it should have the courage to say so, instead of introducing yet more hurdles that will either discourage investment, or worse, simply prevent it because they are impossible to clear.  But the very notion that net-zero-obsessed ministers are about to pave the way for a new era of exploration in the region is in itself laughable. Recent evidence alone would tell you that is emphatically not the case.  First, the regulator rejected Shell's plans to develop the Jackdaw field, east of Aberdeen, which is estimated to hold gas resources equivalent to between 120m and 250m barrels, on the basis of environmental grounds yet to be made public.  Then, Shell was also forced to pull out of plans to extract oil from the Cambo field, off the coast of Shetland, after fierce opposition from green campaigners, and even the threat of legal action from Greenpeace against the Government if exploration went ahead.  Mr Hands says he is "aware" that "home-grown oil and gas is more climatefriendly than imports", as if that alone is proof of the Government's support for North Sea producers, but this is little more than an attempt to spin away the reality.  'If the Government doesn't want further development, it should say so'  Shell's difficulties tell us everything there is to know about the direction of travel and there's nothing positive about it for the people employed there, for the Scottish economy, or indeed for energy security.  There are two giveaway lines in the White Paper proposal: future licences will be granted "only on the basis that they are compatible with the UK's climate change objectives", which means any found to "undermine the UK's climate goals or ability to reach net zero" will be blocked.  As the Department for Business itself acknowledges, this means "an additional layer of scrutiny" will be applied to future licences, alongside an "environmental assessment" carried out by the Offshore Petroleum Regulator for Environment and Decommissioning, and a "net-zero impact assessment" undertaken by the Oil and Gas Authority as part of the consent process for new drilling.  How that is proof that the Government is "supporting the industry in the transition to a lower-carbon future, while also working to achieve the UK's net-zero commitment" is anyone's guess.  On the contrary, the likelihood is that any steps to wind down the North Sea by stealth will rob Britain of its energy independence. Furthermore, by making us even more reliant on imports from unsavoury foreign regimes such as Russia and Saudi Arabia, it will do nothing to help us reach net zero. In short, yet another spectacular own goal from Westminster as it barrels blindly ahead with a green agenda with scant regard for the economic and social consequences. 