 News, Saturday, February 22, 2020 569 mots, p. 8

Tech titans find their climate conscience

New innovations can only go so far in tackling global warming

With the smoke still clearing from Australia's devastating wildfires, and thousands of British householders squelching through flood-ravaged homes, some of the world's richest companies and individuals are finding their climate conscience. Jeff Bezos, the Amazon founder and the world's wealthiest man, this week pledged a $10bn fund to support "scientists, activists, NGOs" or "any effort" with a realistic chance of helping to protect the natural world.

His move followed last month's promise by Microsoft — the world's most valuable company by market capitalisation — to launch a $1bn innovation fund and to go "carbon negative" by 2030, with the aim of offsetting by 2050 all the carbon emissions it has made since its founding in 1975.

US business, including Big Tech, is waking up to the risks of climate change — and trusting in science to find solutions. Donations such as these can give a vital boost to research into technology that could be transformative in the long-term battle to halt rising global temperatures.

Improving battery storage, for example, could transform the shipping industry. Technology to enable the cheaper production of environmentally-friendly hydrogen could lower the cost of clean energy generation, domestic heating and various modes of transport. Better carbon capture knowhow is vital to cleaning up the atmosphere. A true "moonshot"-style approach would include grants to research into nuclear fusion, an elusive technology that has truly transformative possibilities. Microsoft's founder Bill Gates has long been a fusion advocate.

Yet there are dangers in being seduced by tech entrepreneurs' belief that innovation can find silver bullets. Even $10bn is a drop in the ever-rising ocean when it comes to the investments needed to tackle the climate challenge. Governments and the financial sector will have to mobilise resources on a vastly bigger scale to fund the creation of low-emission public transport networks, the shift to renewable energy sources and the insulation of homes and businesses. Their owners' philanthropic efforts should not distract from technology companies' need to change their own practices. While cyber space and the "cloud" may be ethereal concepts, the impact of data centres and computing on the physical world is very tangible. Information and communications technology is estimated to consume between 5 and 9 per cent of the world's electricity.

For all its technological sophistication, moreover, Amazon is still a retailer — one that delivers 10bn items a year. Its supply chain relies heavily on diesel vans for door-to-door deliveries. It ordered 20,000 such vans from Mercedes-Benz in 2018 as part of its investment in faster deliveries for Prime members, though Mr Bezos told staff last year it was ordering 100,000 electric delivery vehicles due to enter its fleet in 2024.

The Amazon chief's generosity is also related to the power of employee pressure. More than 8,700 Amazon staff last April signed an open letter to the founder demanding the company cut its carbon emissions, end its use of fossil fuels, and stop providing "custom solutions" using its technology to help with oil and gas extraction and exploration. Mr Bezos responded with a range of efforts to cut Amazon's carbon footprint — a day before thousands of employees staged a walkout to highlight their criticism of its climate practices. As popular anger builds, company bosses will find out that enacting eco-friendly policies is a business necessity rather than a branding exercise.
