 News, Friday, October 23, 2020 375 mots, p. 6

Aena first to grant annual vote on climate policy
ATTRACTA MOONEY

Aena, the Spanish airports operator, is set to become the first company to give shareholders an annual vote on its efforts to tackle climate change, submitting to pressure from Chris Hohn, the UK hedge fund manager.

The billionaire's TCI Fund Management has for a year been at odds with Aena, in which it is one of the largest independent investors, over its response to global warming. Aena agreed yesterday to his demands in a sign of the pressure on companies to address investors' concerns about climate change.

Maurici Lucena Betriu, chairman and chief executive, said Aena had developed a climate transition plan and would give investors a yearly say on it.

He was "convinced it is a manageable plan", and added: "There will be no trade-off between climate protection and overall profitability."

Institutional investors are increasingly concerned that businesses that are slow to react could be hard hit by the transition to a lower-carbon economy.

Sir Christopher, who sits on Aena's board and helps manage $28bn at TCI, welcomed the plan. "This accountability mechanism is essential for ensuring that companies take the climate issue seriously and are both transparent and accountable to shareholders," he said.

The vote is akin to the advisory socalled say on pay votes held at shareholder meetings in the UK and US.

Under the plan, Aena, which oversees Madrid-Barajas and Palma de Mallorca airports, will generate all of its energy from renewable sources by 2026. The group, which has been hit hard by the pandemic and slumped to a net loss of €171m for the first half of 2020, has also outlined other efforts to reduce its carbon emissions.

"Chris is not the easiest board member I have ever met but I am very happy to work with him because I think the combination is good news for the company and shareholders," said Mr Lucena Betriu.

Investors have been pushing companies to set out plans to transition to a lower-carbon economy but Mr Hohn said the next step was to ensure they had an annual vote on progress.

Sir Christopher's resolution is expected to pass at the group's annual meeting this month because of the Spanish state's majority ownership and management's backing.
