 News, Monday, March 9, 2020 530 mots, p. 12


Climate change tops agenda as UK voting season kicks off
VIEWPOINT Chris Cummings

The firing gun has started on one of the busiest periods of the year for investors. With more than 450 annual general meetings in the UK in the coming months, investment managers will be making their views heard and shaping the direction of corporate Britain. What will top the agenda? As climate change dominates the headlines with images of ferocious wildfires and widespread flooding, so too is it a focus for investors.

Investment management aims to provide sustainable returns for customers, sometimes over horizons of three decades or more, providing an important role in preserving the planet. Climate change will result in a significant loss of value for companies if risks are not properly managed.

That's why the UK's biggest companies will need to show investors exactly what they are doing to tackle climate change. Companies must explain the impact climate change will have on their business in their annual reports. And demonstrate how these risks are being measured to ensure the viability of their businesses. Only by reporting on climaterelated risks in a consistent, clear and comparable manner, can investors make informed decisions.

Alongside climate change, the perennial issues of executive pay and diversity remain centre stage.

Executive pay continues to see high levels of shareholder rebellion. This year is important as many companies will present pay policies for the first time in three years. Investors will be looking to see whether pay increases or changes in pay structures are truly warranted and if they are tracking company performance.

Pay also plays an important role in creating a cohesive and motivated workforce. Investors will be keeping up the pressure on executive pensions, calling for companies to bring those pensions in line with the majority of their workforce. Several chief executives of UK banks, including Lloyds and Barclays, have voluntarily cut their pensions.

The deadline that investment managers expect for companies to bring their pensions for their executive directors in line is 2022, so companies and senior leadership must take action now.

Similarly, investors have long been banging the drum for greater gender diversity. Although progress has been made in improving diversity on FTSE 100 boards, more needs to be done to tackle the lack of women in the FTSE 250 and on senior leadership teams across the FTSE 350. The Investment Association and the Hampton-Alex-ander review wrote to one-fifth of the FTSE 350 demanding action. All eyes will be on companies to demonstrate an improvement on gender diversity, with a number of managers pledging to vote against companies that fail to do so.

Audit quality is also in the spotlight this year. Investors rely on the audit in a company's annual report to make sound investment decisions and to hold companies to account.

This year, audit committees will be expected to better explain how they have judged the quality of the audit and show, when necessary, that they have challenged management judgments.

Companies that don't listen and take action this AGM season can expect to risk the ire of investors. 