'Happy corals': climate crisis sanctuary teeming with
life found off east Africa



Karen McVeigh

15 décembre
2020

Scientists have discovered a climate crisis refuge for coral reefs off the coast of Kenya
and Tanzania, where species are thriving despite warming events that have killed their
neighbours.

The coral sanctuary is a wildlife hotspot, teeming with spinner dolphins and boasting
rare species, including prehistoric fish and dugongs. Researchers believe its location in
a cool spot in the ocean is helping to protect it and the surrounding marine life from the
harmful effects of the climate crisis.

Tim McClanahan, the author of a study on the refuge published this month in Advances
in Marine Biology, has been looking for coral sanctuaries in the west Indian Ocean for
more than a decade.

“I’m very excited about it,” McClanahan said. “It gives us something to hope for. Some
good news in gloomy times.”

Marine biologists are scouring the ocean to find and protect coral refuges – areas where
reefs have the best chance to survive the climate crisis.

Deep-sea ‘gold rush’: secretive plans to carve up the seabed decried

McClanahan, the lead scientist for the  Wildlife Conservation Society, who lives and
works in Mombasa, Kenya, said he had an “epiphany” when he realised why the reef was
so rich in wildlife. The coastline has the highest density of dolphins in east Africa, and
coelacanths, fish once believed extinct, swim in its deep waters. “I thought ‘why are all
the animals here?’ And I realised it was because of Kilimanjaro,” he said.

The coral refuge, which stretches from Shimoni, 50 miles south of Mombasa, in Kenya
to Dar es Salaam in Tanzania, is fed by cool water from deep channels formed
thousands of years ago by glacial runoff from Kilimanjaro and the Usambara
mountains.

The cool water appears to protect the corals from episodic warming events like El Niño.

McClanahan put temperature gauges along the coast and used satellite data to monitor
them. Then, when there was a warming event, which occur only every few years, he got
into the water to see its effects for himself.


“It turns out there is a long stretch from Kenyan waters into Dar Es Salaam where these
warm water events like El Niño don’t penetrate. So the stress killing corals does not
penetrate. Outside that area, the corals are bleached and dying. But inside the area, of
around 400 sq km [150 sq miles] they retain their colour and their health. They are
reds and brown. My research partner likes to call them: ‘happy corals’.”

McClanahan said he has found three potential coral sanctuaries in the western Indian
Ocean, but only for this one is the available scientific evidence “pretty strong”.

Part of his research was to examine whether – if fisheries are better managed – the
effects of global heating could be mitigated in the ocean.

“Our study shows that while warming waters may devastate surrounding reefs, this area
could become an incredibly important sanctuary where marine species big and small
will flock to find refuge from climate change,” he said. “If well protected, this key
transboundary marine ecosystem will remain a jewel of biodiversity for the entire east
African coast.”

Unfortunately, however, the climate crisis is not the only threat to the area’s biodiversity
and the newly discovered refuge. Unsustainable fishing continues, and there are future
plans for coastal development, including a port in northern Tanzania.




