 GLOBAL INSIGHT - CLIVE COOKSON, Friday, January 29, 2010 543 mots, p. 11

Climate sceptics bask in the light as science steers clear of debate
By Clive Cookson

Climate scientists were desperately hoping for a fresh start this year after the disappointing outcome of last month's Copenhagen conference and the "Climategate" debacle, in which e-mails stolen from the University of East Anglia allegedly showed scientists suppressing data that did not suit their case for man-made global warming.

However, far from enjoying a respite, bad news continues to flow. Yesterday, for example, the UK Information Commissioner's Office said UEA's climatic research unit breached freedom of information rules by failing to provide data requested by climate sceptics, though complaints were made too late for the university to face legal action.

More serious may be an assault on the reputation of the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, whose assessments underpin the whole UN-sponsored battle against global warming.

The most damaging revelation is that a forecast in the IPCC's 2007 report, the likely disappearance of Himalayan glaciers by 2035, was based on an unsubstantiated assertion rather than good science. The IPCC was forced into an apology and a promise by Rajendra Pachauri, its chairman, that "we will ensure greater consistency in the next assessment report".

Climate sceptics sense an opportunity to weaken or even destroy a body they have always disliked - because its reports have shown how widespread is the scientific consensus on man-made global warming - and have loathed since it won a share of the 2007 Nobel Peace Prize with Al Gore, the former US vice-president.

Other accusations are flowing from sceptics' publications. Two frequent examples are that the IPCC's conclusions about Amazon deforestation and the increasing risk of storms in a warming world are also based on unsubstantiated work. There are snide comments too about Mr Pachauri's lifestyle and alleged conflicts of interest.

Environmental scientists are proving poor defenders of what remains their overwhelming view: that human activities - mainly the use of coal, oil and gas - are inducing climate change that will become ever more dangerous and requires urgent action. The reluctanceto speak out is reminiscent of the silence a few years ago when plant genetic engineering was under sustained assault, particularly in Europe.

The big difference is that then scientific consensus - that genetically modified crops were safe and desirable to increase agricultural productivity - was being attacked by environmental groups, which accused researchers of being in thrall to big biotech. Now scientists are on the same side of the climate change argument as campaigning groups such as Friends of the Earth and Greenpeace, but they still seem shy about public debate.

Interestingly a movement to defend the IPCC and Mr Pachauri is developing in his native India, apparently motivated partly by national pride. Darryl D'Monte, who chairs the Indian environmental journalists' forum, wrote in The Hindustan Times that "vested interests, using British media, are seeking to discredit the IPCC . . . A smear campaign is being launched to undermine Pachauri and ultimately the IPCC."

The few prominent scientists who have commented on recent events have emphasised the need for transparency in the IPCC and climate research more generally. No longer should there be such an emphasis on consensus in a field where there was still uncertainty on the effects of rising carbon dioxide levels.

China has called for sceptics' views to be included in the next IPCC assessment, though it will be hard to find many reputable scientists who deny that human activities will have a big impact on climate in the near future.

But the converse should also be true. Some scientists believe the last IPCC assessment was too cautious. The next one, they say, should give greater prominence to the loss of heat-reflecting polar ice and the release of vast quantities of methane (a greenhouse gas) through the melting of permafrost.

It remains to be seen whether Mr Pachauri can wrest back the initiative. For now the sceptics are enjoying the spotlight.

Green is the colour, Page 15
