Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, September 18, 2010BRITAIN'S BIG PROBLEM WITH WATERGeoffrey LeanThink of countries which don't have enough water and your mind might fly to arid, largely desert nations in the Middle East and North Africa: Syria or Sudan, say, or perhaps Egypt and Morocco. But, you could also consider somewhere closer to hand: the most prosperous part of our green and pleasant land is worse off than any of them.That seems pretty improbable. After all, ours is a notoriously soggy nation where it often seems that, as Shakespeare put it, "the rain it raineth every day". But it's true. South-east England has less water per capita than the countries above.Partly, that's because we are two nations when it comes to the weather. The North and West normally get plenty of rain - often more than they want - but the South and East receive less than some parts of the Mediterranean. Added to which, it's the most heavily populated part of the country.Things are only going to get worse. Another one and half million homes have been planned for the overcrowded region over the next 15 years. And global warming is expected to sharpen the dampness divide over the next 70, increasing rainfall sharply in the wet part of the country and cutting it by as much as half in the South and East.An Institute for Public Policy Research study has predicted permanent water-rationing in the South East by 2025. And last week Lord Krebs - launching another report - suggested that families should face extra charges for using it excessively.The report, by the Government's Committee on Climate Change, looks at how well-prepared Britain is for the effects of global warming. Almost all official efforts so far have gone into trying to minimise them, by restraining emissions of carbon dioxide, for example. But, as the report concludes, some climate change is now inevitable.Average annual temperatures in Britain have already risen by about a degree Celcius since the 1970s, and could increase by some four degrees in southern England by 2080.Extreme heatwaves - like the one that killed 2,000 people in Britain in 2003 - are "likely to become the norm". Sea levels are expected to rise - by at least 16in near London, for example - and droughts and extreme downpours to increase.As the South East gets drier, the damper part of the country is likely to suffer increasing floods, with "extremely wet winters" up to five times more common. Already flooding is twice as frequent as it was 100 years ago, and the Environment Agency expects it to increase tenfold over coming decades.Yet half of all the housing built in Britain since the Second World War - covering a total area the size of the West Midlands - has been plonked down on land prone to inundation. Successive governments have neglected flood defences; when the big 2007 floods came, only about half were in good condition. A government study headed by the former chief scientist, Sir David King, estimated that the cost of damage could rise from an average of around GBP2 billion a year to more than GBP25 billion by 2080. And the Association of British Insurers suggested that new houses in the Thames Gateway should be built with their living areas on the first floor.Lord Krebs last week suggested that houses should also be fitted with shutters to help them keep cool, that millions of trees should be planted in streets to make them bearable to walk in, and that roads should be given new surfaces that will not melt in the heat. Hospitals and other vital buildings should be built on high ground and railways and other essential infrastructure protected from flooding.In all, the report says, such precautionary measures would halve the ill-effects of the moderate amount of warming that might be expected if governments took urgent steps to reduce emissions (at higher temperatures such adaptation will be much harder if not impossible). But so far little is being done.It found that only seven per cent of local authorities had plans to cope with climate change - and none had begun to implement them - while few businesses had made any preparations, even though 87 per cent of top companies believed that they were exposed to risks from global warming. And only six per cent of families in flood-prone areas were taking action to protect their homes.There are a few encouraging signs.Water companies are taking some measures to conserve supplies and councils are finally beginning to take flood risk seriously in planning decisions. But we have hardly begun.And yet it should be relatively easy to agree on action. Even many people who do not believe that humanity is causing global warming do accept that things are hotting up. Keeping Britain pleasant, after all, should not be left to the Greens.