 Telegraph (London, UK) Wednesday, September 1, 2010DR PACHAURI IS DAMAGING THE WORLDGeoffrey LeanBeware of winning the Nobel Peace Prize - for the world's highest accolade for the great and supposedly good, endowed by and named after the inventor of dynamite, has a nasty habit of blowing up in the face of those who ceremoniously receive it.For Barack Obama, things have only gone downhill since he was awarded the prize (prematurely, to put it at its kindest) last year. Al Gore has looked increasingly tarnished since getting it in 2007. Although most past winners have been praiseworthy choices, others have included Yasser Arafat, Henry Kissinger and Le Duc Tho (although the North Vietnamese revolutionary-turned-negotiator had the grace to refuse to accept).Yet no fall from grace has been so unforeseen as that of Gore's co-winner, the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change. Just two years after picking up the prize, the UN organisation - chiefly criticised until then for its caution in interpreting the growing evidence of climate change - was plunged into controversy, after it was found grossly to have exaggerated the rate at which Himalayan glaciers are melting.Climate sceptics were quick to seize on other "errors" in the IPCC's latest 3,000-page report - sometimes justifiably. Coinciding with the cold winter in Britain and the US, the controversy caused by hacked emails from the Climatic Research Unit at the University of East Anglia, and the disappointing outcome of the Copenhagen climate summit, the furore severely eroded public support for measures to tackle global warming.Now an inquiry carried out under the auspices of the world's top 15 academies of sciences, including Britain's Royal Society, has revealed shortcomings in the IPCC's organisation and management. It strongly suggests that the panel's controversial chairman, Rajendra Pachauri - who collected the Nobel Prize on his institution's behalf - should not continue in his post.It found that the IPCC had disregarded its own guidelines on how to communicate scientific uncertainties in one of the "summaries for policymakers" that it published with its latest report: "many statements... are assigned high confidence, but are based on little evidence". It highlighted flaws in the review process, pointing out that the Himalayan howler was identified by two participating scientists while the report was being prepared, without being corrected. It revealed that the leaders of the IPCC, like Dr Pachauri, were not subject to a policy on potential conflicts of interest - unlike its staff, which have to obey strict UN rules. And it is concerned that the panel may have strayed beyond its remit of laying out the science into advocating specific policies.Admittedly, climate sceptics will be far from happy, because the report provides no support for their main charges. Like the three inquiries carried out into the emails controversy at UEA, it has found nothing to undermine the basic science of global warming; the statements it criticises are overconfident predictions about the precise effects that climate change may have, rather than judgments on whether it is occurring in the first place.Also, far from being the overmighty, all-controlling leviathan depicted by some of its opponents, the inquiry shows the IPCC to be an amateurish, ramshackle operation with 10 staff, a part-time boss, and poor public relations skills - struggling with the increasing torrent of scientific studies on the climate, and "sluggish" and inept at responding to publicity and criticism.It recommends setting up a proper management structure, including an executive committee and a full-time executive director. And it also recommends that no chairman should serve more than one six-year term. It is hard not believe that this is aimed at Dr Pachauri, who was elected to a second term two years ago. Indeed, Dr Harold Shapiro, the Princeton economist who led the inquiry, has confirmed that the "one logical conclusion" was that Dr Pachauri should go.Dr Shapiro said he was not criticising Dr Pachauri personally, but there is no doubt he should go. As the IPCC's leader, Dr Pachauri is ultimately responsible for the defects identified by the inquiry. Worse, he has done much to aggravate them. He has been in the vanguard of the panel's detour into policy pronouncements - for example, by calling a decision by President Obama not to try for a full climate treaty in Copenhagen "an abandonment of moral responsibility". And his bombastic rejection last winter of any criticism deepened the crisis.But he is refusing to quit, saying he will stay to implement the changes unless he is dismissed by the representatives of the 194 governments who run the IPCC. That is most unlikely to happen. In the arcane world of UN politics, heads of organisations are rarely unseated when they are backed by their own governments, and India reiterated its support for Dr Pachauri only yesterday. Other developing countries will defend one of their own.Yesterday, it was revealed that Bjorn Lomborg, long regarded by many climate scientists as one of their fiercest opponents, is to call for $100billion a year to be spent on combating global warming, calling it "one of the chief concerns facing the world today". Pachauri was once quoted as comparing Lomborg to Hitler, but today the self-styled "sceptical environmentalist" appears the bigger man. Until the IPCC chairman is similarly able to adapt to the realities, his organisation, his cause - and that Peace Prize - will inevitably be damaged and devalued.