Telegraph (London, UK) Thursday, July 15, 2010PRINCE ACCUSES THE CLIMATE SCEPTICSLouise Gray Environment CorrespondentTHE Prince of Wales has accused climate change sceptics of using "pseudo science" and "intimidation" to stop the world from addressing catastrophic global warming. He likened the failure to combat rising temperatures across the world to playing "Russian roulette with the future of our children".The Prince said more and more people were listening to the "siren voices" of climate change sceptics who argued that the theory of man-made global warming was simply a "sinister attempt to undermine the capitalist system". Addressing hundreds of business leaders at St James's Palace yesterday, he said: "It has been profoundly depressing to witness the way the socalled climatesceptics are, apparently, able to intimidate all sorts of people from adopting the precautionary measures necessary to avert environmental collapse."For too long we have treated the planet like a perpetual cash machine which doles out money without there ever being any need to check the bank balance."But now, finally, the money is running out."Recent incidents have damaged the reputation of climate science. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change was forced to apologise after mistakenly claiming that the Himalayan glaciers could melt by 2035. Scientists at the University of East Anglia were also accused of exaggerating the extent of global temperature rises. Although the British researchers were cleared of dishonesty, the so-called "climategate" saga coupled with the coldest winter in Britain for 30 years led to a fall in the number of Britons who believe global warming is caused by humans. A recent survey showed 70 per cent of people in Britain believed climate change was man-made compared with 90 per cent five years ago. The Prince said scepticism was "on the rise" and called on the private sector to use the power of their brands to persuade the public to take global warming seriously. -Climate change is having a dramatic impact on the seas and wildlife around the British Isles with some fish migrating up to 250 miles to the north, a wide-ranging government report claims. According to the annual report by almost 100 scientists from 40 leading British organisations, ocean levels and temperatures are rising, resulting in fish and breeding seabirds abandoning the coasts.