Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, December 11, 2010ACTION SPEAKS LOUDER THAN HOT AIRGeoffrey LeanIt passed almost unnoticed, but an apparently unexciting business announcement on the very first day of the Cancun climatesummit may well do more to combat global warming than the two weeks of talks that followed. This is not just because it amounted to rare action amid the millions of words spoken, written and printed on enough paper to require the felling of a small forest - but because it represents an early move in a new, more effective strategy to avert dangerous climate change.Four hundred leading companies - including Tesco, Unilever, Coca-Cola, Kraft, Walmart, Procter and Gamble and L'Oreal - said they would be switching refrigerants within the next five years. Important to them, you might think, but not the sort of thing to stir the blood unless you're the type of person that finds coolants really cool.But bear with me. The chemicals, hydrofluorocarbons (HFCs), are greenhouse gases. Yet even that is not the point. What makes the announcement exceptional is that they are among a handful of overlooked pollutants whose reduction would reduce global warming far quicker, and with much less fuss, than trying to cut emissions of carbon dioxide, the object of the climate negotiations which have ground on, with little success, for two decades.For despite the virtually exclusive attention paid to it, carbon dioxide is only half the problem. These other pollutants - black carbon, ozone, and methane, as well as HFCs - contribute about the same amount to climate change.Black carbon, which gives soot its colour, is the biggest cause of climate change after carbon dioxide. Mainly emitted from inefficient stoves in developing countries and the exhausts of diesel vehicles, it absorbs solar radiation when airborne, helping to heat the globe. And when it falls out on to snow or ice, it darkens them, making them absorb less sunlight and melt faster: it has played a major part in shrinking Himalayan glaciers.We should be on its case even if global warming were not taking place, for it is a mass murderer. At least 1.6million people, mainly women and children in the Third World, perish every year from breathing it in from smoke generated by their stoves. And people in Britain are twice as likely to die from respiratory disease when heavily exposed to its emission from exhausts.Similarly, ozone (when near ground level, rather than in the life-saving layer in the atmosphere) is a nasty component of smog, contributing to the asthma epidemic which affects one in seven British children - besides causing tens of billions of dollars worth of damage to crops worldwide.It is also much easier to tackle these pollutants than carbon dioxide. None is defended by such powerful, and often unscrupulous, interests as the oil and coal industries. They can largely be addressed by local and national authorities using existing laws, without having to wait for an international treaty. And most of the solutions are known, with technologies in place.California, for example, has halved its emissions of black carbon from diesel engines over the past two decades, and non-polluting stoves are increasingly being developed. Cutting ozone levels is a part of air pollution programmes worldwide, even if we have an atrocious record of doing it in Britain. Relatively simple measures could slash methane emissions by 40 per cent. The business initiative will do much to reduce HFC use. And so on.All this can be done far faster than negotiating, ratifying and implementing a new treaty on carbon dioxide, which will take years, at least. And it would also have a much faster effect. While CO2 remains in the atmosphere, warming it for centuries, even millennia, these other pollutants disappear in less than a decade, sometimes in days, making it possible to have an immediate effect on slowing climate change. Studies show that a vigorous programme to tackle them would buy decades of desperately needed time in which to cut carbon dioxide emissions, offering much the best chance of bringing global warming under control.But even though most of this was established a quarter of a century ago, these forgotten causes of global warming were again almost totally ignored in the Cancun talks. The pressure groups were equally silent; only a handful take any interest amid the thousands campaigning over CO2.Why? One reason is that the groups find it easier to raise funds when railing against a powerful enemy, like the oil companies. Another is ideologicial - for some environmentalists, CO2 is a handy stick for beating capitalism. A third lies in the myopia of scientists who can't see beyond the main cause of global warming.The battle to cut carbon dioxide must continue unabated; there will be no permanent solution until it is drastically reduced. But in the meantime it is crazy, as the industries showed, to ignore the simple, immediate measures that could make saving the climatepossible.