Telegraph (London, UK) Friday, August 6, 2010BRILLIANTLY INVENTIVE, FIERCELY FLASHYCharles SpencerTHEATRE EARTHQUAKES IN LONDON NATIONAL THEATRE WHOOOOSH! And, indeed, wow! Mike Bartlett's Earthquakes in London is the theatrical equivalent of a thrilling rollercoaster ride. It swoops and twists, rushes and soars, and provides a great shot of adrenalin-fuelled excitement. With a running time of more than three hours there are, as on a big-dipper, moments when you wish the bloody thing would stop, and, at the end, exhilaration gives way to a slight feeling of anticlimax.But the sheer energy and ambition of the piece are irresistible, while Rupert Goold directs a brilliantly inventive, unashamedly flashy production that adds greatly to the excitement.The play is an account of life, love and profound unease in present-day London, but it also looks back to 1968 and forward to the years 2026, and 2525, the latter, significantly, the title of a doom-laden 1969 pop song by one-hit wonders Zager and Evans.The nub of Bartlett's play is that disaster may overwhelm Planet Earth long before then, and the show's mood of febrile anxiety about global warming at times succeeded in niggling even a crusty climate-change sceptic like myself.What's surprising, however, is how much fun this dark show provides. In a coproduction between the NT and Goold's Headlong company, the Cottesloe auditorium has been spectacularly transformed. Many in the audience sit on bar stools at curvy counters on which the actors perform.At either end of the auditorium there are two raised proscenium-arch stages for more intimate scenes, and throughout the play combines the political and the personal, bruising family drama and off-the-wall humour.One moment you are voyeurs at a burlesque show, the next watching appalled as a family of three sisters tear themselves to shreds, only to find yourself laughing with rueful recognition at Bartlett's spot-on depiction of the nervy energy of life in our capital.Goold's marvellously wellacted and spectacular production is blessed with terrific visual coups, stirring rock music and a hurtling narrative pace, though Bartlett's thesis that today's youth have been betrayed by their baby-boomer parents is beginning to seem a touch over-familiar and glib. The father of the sisters is a scientist, who accepted cash from the airline industry to hush up the dangers of global warming. Now he is a lonely prophet of doom, who has cut off ties with his family and believes that unpreventable disaster awaits the planet.Meanwhile, his daughters struggle to make sense of their lives. Lia Williams is compelling as a harassed, emotionally steely, Coalition Government climate-change minister (the play is satisfyingly up-to-the minute), whose marriage is falling apart. The middle sister, played with a moving mixture of tenderness and despair by Anna Madeley, is about to give birth to her first child and is driven close to madness at the thought of the world that awaits her baby, while the teenage wild-child Jasmine (a splendidly spunky Jessica Raine) rages at the older generation.There is sterling support from Bill Paterson as the steely paterfamilias, Geoffrey Streatfeild and Tom Goodman-Hill as the sisters' anxious husbands, and Bryony Hannah as a comic yet deeply disconcerting schoolboy.The play would benefit from cuts and the ending strikes me as grotesquely sentimental, but such reservations seem niggling in the face of such a rush of invention, humour and raw emotion.