Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, April 3, 2010WHAT HAPPENED TO THE GREEN TORIES?Geoffrey Lean'Look around," I was urged at a launch party the other day. "You can tell there's a new intellectual tide running by the number of bright young women in short skirts."My companion - female, I hasten to say - was not being sexist, but making the point that one way of finding an idea whose time has come is to see where the smartest young people are to be found. For it was not just the women: the launch of the Conservative Environment Network, at the Saatchi brothers' London offices last month, was awash with the formidably intelligent and frighteningly youthful of both sexes. Rarely have I felt so old, or so dim.Yet scanning the room, something was missing - the Tory leadership. There was no Oliver Letwin, their verifiably verdant policy chief; no George Osborne, who has promised to make the Treasury "a green ally, not a foe"; no William Hague, despite a recent speech identifying climate change as one of his two main foreign policy priorities; and, above all, no David Cameron, arguably the most environmentally friendly party leader to date.The young organisers of the new green ginger group were disappointed: so much did they value visible top-level endorsement that they were even hoping, in vain, to bag Iain Duncan Smith. True, the shadow environment and climate change secretaries did tip up - but they could scarcely have stayed away.It was strange, for the occasion exhibited exactly the new face of Toryism of which Cameron dreamt on becoming leader. In his early years, you could hardly keep him away from green gatherings: indeed, he and David Miliband first met socially in a doorway, as one entered, and the other left, a Friends of the Earth shindig. That was when he transformed the Tories' logo into a squiggle representing a sturdy British oak, visited the Arctic to hug a husky and deplore global warming, and campaigned in the local elections under the slogan: "Vote blue, go green."The absence of the party's lions from that launch has not been the only sign of the browning of its priorities. There is no mention of the environment in the six things the party says it "stands for" on its website. And in last week's Ask the Chancellors debate the only mention of greenery that I heard came - unexpectedly - from Alistair Darling.If you raise all this with top Tories, as I did last week, you are asked, in effect: "Don't you realise there's an election on?" The leadership now has far less time to attend events, you are told, and the environment always loses priority as polling day approaches, partly because it rarely comes up on the doorstep.It is true that voters in Britain tend not to see green issues as political ones, not least because the policies of the major parties have normally been broadly similar. Nor, it appears, has Cameron's commitment dimmed. He insisted on personally launching his party's new energy policy document - probably the greenest and most comprehensive yet produced by a major party - 10 days ago, and more is promised. "Judge us by our manifesto," one senior Conservative source says. "It will be the most radical and serious green plan ever put before the electorate by any of the great parties."If so, the Tories would benefit from talking about it. Concentrating on conventional economic politics over the past few months - and on projecting Cameron as a tough leader for hard times - could have been more successful: in a sharp reversal, many more people now trust Labour on the economy. Millions still feel, especially after its recent gyrations over cuts, that they do not know what the party stands for, and fewer than two in five Britons believe it shares their values.One thing the public thought they knew about Cameron was that he was green, thanks to his early emphasis on the environment. Downplaying this now adds to the confusion over the Conservative message, and even raises suspicions of Blairite insincerity.Though it is rarely top-of-mind on the doorstep, poll after poll shows that the environment is central to voters' value judgments: politicians now have to have credible green policies - just as they do defence ones - to be electable. And despite the climatescience furore and the failure of Copenhagen, global warming remains a surprisingly potent issue politically: a new poll carried out for the Institute of Public Policy Research shows that it is among the key vote-deciding issues for 17 per cent of the electorate in marginal constituencies, and especially important among swing voters and under-35s.The Tories, moreover, have done the work on how to bring about lowcarbon prosperity. Though all the main parties now support what now looks like becoming the next big economic theme, they have the most thorough and thought-out policies. That is what is attracting the bright and the young. So why is the leadership so bashful?