Telegraph (London, UK) Saturday, October 16, 2010GOODBYE, CFCS. HELLO, HFCSGeoffrey LeanRemember CFCs? They were the apparently harmless chemicals once used in aerosol cans, hamburger trays, fridges and a host of other everyday objects that once threatened to damage life on earth. For, after doing their job cooling food, puffing up foam and providing spray-on sex appeal, they drifted up into the stratosphere to attack the planet's vital ozone layer.The cholorofluorocarbons, to give them their full name, are long gone from our lives. They have been banned from industrialised countries by international treaty since the mid-1990s, and developing countries have followed suit. But because they are particularly long-lived substances, they have stuck around at dangerous levels in the atmosphere, continuing to do their worst.Now, finally, they have begun to decline. The world's most authoritative survey - the fouryearly Scientific Assessment of Ozone Depletion, compiled by 300 senior scientists - reported this autumn that levels of CFC 12, one of the most common types, have fallen for the first time. Partly as a result, the report confirms, the ozone layer over most of the earth will be back to normal by the middle of the century (the exception, for complicated reasons, is the hole that opens up over Antarctica each southern spring, which will take a lot longer to mend).This is good news not just for human health, but for the battle against global warming, and offers a way forward despite the stalled international climate negotiations.Ozone - a blue-tinged and pungent form of oxygen - forms a fragile shield, strangely insubstantial but remarkably effective. Scattered so thinly through the 21-mile deep stratosphere that if it were all gathered together it would form a girdle around the earth no thicker than the sole of a shoe, it screens out almost all the harmful ultraviolet radiation of the sun.No other known planet has anything like it and, if it had not developed here, the earth would probably be inhabited by no more than the most primitive underwater life. Indeed, the little radiation that does get through is the main cause of skin cancer and also induces cataracts.In the 1970s and 1980s, research showed that CFCs and other ozonedepleting chemicals were beginning to weaken the shield and - led by Ronald Reagan's United States - governments agreed a treaty to get rid of them. The resulting 1987 Montreal Protocol has proved to be the world's most effective environmental agreement, phasing out almost 100 damaging substances.Without it, reckons Achim Steiner, executive director of the United Nations Environment Programme, the thinning of the ozone layer could have led to "up to 20 million more cases of skin cancer and 130 million more cases of eye cataracts, not to speak of damage to human immune systems, wildlife and agriculture".But that's not all. As a by-product, the treaty has also proved to be the most effective measure governments have ever taken to combat climate change, since CFCs are also powerful greenhouse gases. Indeed, as the new Scientific Assessment reports, it has been five times as effective in reducing global warming than the Kyoto Protocol, the main climate treaty, would be even if it were fully implemented. Prof Mario Molina, who won a Nobel Prize for his pioneering research on CFCs, has estimated that it has delayed warming by 12 years and may have kept the world from "passing the 'tipping point' for abrupt and irreversible  ".And there lies a threat, and an opportunity. The substances being used to replace CFCs - HCFCs and HFCs - though much better for the ozone layer, also contribute to global warming. The use of HCFCs is accelerating, though they are to be phased out by 2030 - 10 years earlier than originally intended, thanks to an agreement partially brokered by George W Bush. But emissions of HFCs are sky-rocketing, with no end in sight: the new assessment reckons that, if uncontrolled, they could undo all the good done for the climate by the banning of CFCs in the first place.The danger is imminent because China and India are beginning to invest heavily in HFC production, even though safe substitutes are available.But this also presents an opportunity to make progress while the climate negotiations are becalmed in the wake of last year's disappointing Copenhagen summit. Countries as diverse as the United States and the Federated States of Micronesia, Canada and Mexico now all want to amend the Montreal Protocol to phase out HFCs, too.Unsurprisingly, India and China are resisting. But getting rid of existing HFCs would buy more time for the essential, if difficult and controversial, task of curbing carbon dioxide emissions - while stopping their rapid growth could prevent disaster.It's time for them to follow the CFCs into the bin.