 COMMENT, Friday, January 29, 2010 596 mots, p. 9

Green is the colour of climate change discord
Fiona Harvey

Climate change negotiations will grind into gear again this weekend, after last month's chaotic summit in Copenhagen ended with a partial accord signed by the world's biggest economies. The weary process - it has been going on since 1992 - is supposed to yield, by the end of this year, a legally binding treaty that would be the first to require both developed and developing countries to limit their greenhouse gas emissions.

If the United Nations and the proponents of such a deal are serious in their stated aims, the best thing they could do would be to keep environmentalists out of the process.

Green campaigning groups played an exceptionally destructive role in the two weeks of the Copenhagen summit. They fomented discord among developing nations and their rejection of all compromises provided a cover for those governments with a vested interest in the talks' failure. Climate sceptics rejoiced - the greens were doing a far better job of wrecking Copenhagen than they ever could.

Copenhagen was always going to be a failure in the eyes of campaigning groups such as Greenpeace, Friends of the Earth and Oxfam. Developed country governments could never meet their demands to slash emissions by 40 per cent by 2020 compared with 1990 levels. So the green responses to the summit had been written weeks before - as the meeting closed, dozens of fingers hovered over the "send" key on prepared texts.

Seen without green lenses, however, the accord cannot be so easily dismissed. The scenes of chaos in the final hours of the summit overshadowed its achievement: the world's biggest economies, rich and poor, agreed for the first time to reduce emissions and limit global warming.

In advance of the summit, the UN's aims were that rich countries should set emissions reduction targets for 2020; that poor countries should agree measures to curb emissions growth; that the rich world should provide financing to the poor; and that governments should set a timetable for signing a legally binding treaty.

The first three of these were achieved. There was a caveat - governments did not specify their emissions targets, but must do so by January 31. But all of the major economies have publicly stated targets they will find embarrassing to renege upon.

Hardly the unmitigated failure, then, that many claimed. True, much of the detail remains to be filled in - how to raise the $100bn a year that rich countries have pledged to provide by 2020, for instance. Nor was the accord technically adopted in full, thanks the antics of a handful of countries - chiefly Venezuela, Bolivia, Nicaragua and Sudan.

The next task - turning the accord into a legally binding treaty - will be far harder than the negotiations so far. In a series of meetings culminating in Mexico in December, green groups could wreak even more havoc.

During last year's talks, non-governmental organisations encouraged small countries such as the Pacific island states to reject the consensus - held for the preceding two years of negotiations - that the world should aim to confine warming to 2 degrees above pre-industrial levels, which scientists regard as the limit of safety. If that debate is reopened this year, it will be fatal to any hopes of progress.

Green groups also provided a smokescreen for China and other big developing countries to exert influence on smaller nations with which they have ties. Many developed country governments suspected China - which in recent days has publicly cast doubt on the science of man-made global warming - of urging some of these countries to reject compromises. China is the world's biggest emitter, and has an appalling record on air and water pollution. Yet in climate negotiations its sins go unmentioned, and it is praised to the skies by environmental groups for its meagre targets. Beijing has few better friends.

Copenhagen laid bare the frailties of the UN process. For a climate deal to be reached, each nation must agree to it in every detail. This is proving so difficult that some countries have argued for seeking a treaty among a smaller group such as the G20.

If the UN were stronger, it might be able to deal with the NGOs and stand up to the likes of China. But that would require an overhaul of the negotiating processes, which could take years. Every year without a climate treaty makes the goal of halting climate change harder to achieve. 