Business/Financial, Thursday, November 4, 2010, p. B 5Obama to Face New Foes In Global Warming FightBy JOHN M. BRODERWASHINGTON -- The Obama administration and the new Congress appear headed for early confrontations over the reach of environmental regulation and federal subsidies for fossil fuel development.The administration is moving determinedly forward on a series of actions to limit emissions of greenhouse gases and other air pollutants, to restrict some coal mining practices and to eliminate multibillion-dollar tax breaks for the oil and gas industry.Those initiatives have already generated bipartisan objections in both houses of Congress, and the numbers in opposition grew with Tuesday's voting. Many of the newly elected members have expressed skepticism about the existence of global warming and say they strongly oppose government action to combat it.The presumptive new Republican speaker of the House, John A. Boehner of Ohio, has dismissed the idea that carbon dioxide is affecting the climate and has characterized cap and trade and other proposed solutions to global warming as job-killing energy taxes.He and other Republican leaders in both houses, along with many Democrats and a number of state attorneys general, support measures to block the Environmental Protection Agency from regulating carbon dioxide and other greenhouse gases, as it plans to do starting in January.They will find fervent and well-financed support from business interests that fear the effect of such regulation on their cost of doing business. John Engler, the former Republican governor of Michigan and now president of the National Association of Manufacturers, said on Wednesday that the new Congress should assert stronger control over E.P.A., which, as he put it, "is getting way outside its authority in trying to regulate that which cannot pass in the legislative process."Mr. Obama has clearly narrowed his ambitions on environmental and energy policy, scrapping any hope of enacting comprehensive legislation to deal with climate change and the nation's dependence on imported oil. He said he was not seeking confrontation with Congress over regulation of greenhouse gases."Cap and trade was just one way of skinning the cat; it was not the only way" Mr. Obama said in his press conference Wednesday. "And I'm going to be looking for other means to address this problem. And I think the E.P.A. wants help from the legislature on this. I don't think that, you know, the desire is to somehow be protective of their powers here. I think what they want to do is make sure that the issue's being dealt with."Instead of seeking a broad approach to energy and climate change, Mr. Obama said, he would look for smaller policy bites that could attract Republican support. He said he hoped to generate wide support in the new Congress for further development of electric vehicles, for converting some of the nation's heavy truck fleet to run on natural gas, for incentives for energy efficiency in buildings and appliances, and for more emphasis on renewable energy and nuclear power. He said such programs lead to innovation and can create thousands of jobs.Tuesday's voting offered a brutal verdict for many of those members of the House who had voted for the cap-and-trade approach that Mr. Obama has now abandoned. Some three dozen House Democrats who supported the 2009 climate bill were turned out of office.Supporters of the measure, sponsored by Democratic Representatives Henry A. Waxman of California and Edward J. Markey of Massachusetts, noted that more than half of the 43 Democrats who voted against the measure also lost their seats, meaning that for most voters the election was not simply a referendum on the climate bill.Even as voters in many states were issuing a rebuke to lawmakers who supported climate change legislation in Washington, the people of California, as is their custom, were moving in a different direction. They soundly defeated Proposition 23, an oil-industry-sponsored measure to gut the state's landmark global warming law that will set strict limits on greenhouse gas emissions and create a trading system for pollution permits.California voters also re-elected the Democrat Barbara Boxer to the Senate and returned a Democrat, Jerry Brown, to the governor's office -- both strong supporters of state and federal action on climate change.A coalition of unions, environmental groups, Silicon Valley investors and people in the clean energy industry raised $25 million to defeat Proposition 23, which was written and financed by out-of-state oil companies.Thomas F. Steyer, a San Francisco hedge fund billionaire who served as co-chairman of the group that campaigned against the proposition, said the nation would follow California's lead."When it comes to huge, significant change, the history of the United States is that it does not come from Washington, D.C.," Mr. Steyer said. "It comes from people outside the capital, people much closer to the real world, who force change gradually, bit by bit. A change in this nation's energy economy is inevitable. The question is, how soon?"