Telegraph (London, UK) Monday, November 29, 2010CALL FOR WAR RATIONING TO BEAT GLOBAL WARMINGLouise Gray Environment CorrespondentGLOBAL warming is now such a serious threat to mankind that climate change experts are calling for Second World War-style rationing in rich countries to bring down carbon emissions.In a series of papers published by The Royal Society, physicists and chemists from scientific institutions including Oxford University and the Met Office said that current plans to tackle global warming were not enough.Unless emissions are reduced dramatically in the next 10 years, global temperatures are expected to rise by more than 4C (7.2F) by 2060, causing floods, droughts and mass migration.As experts met in Cancun, Mexico, for the latest round of United Nations talks on climate change, the academics called for tougher measures to cut carbon emissions.In one paper, Prof Kevin Anderson, the director of the Tyndall Centre for Climate Change Research, said the only way to reduce global emissions sufficiently, while allowing poorer nations to continue to grow, was to halt economic growth in wealthy countries over the next 20 years. This would mean a drastic change in lifestyles for many people in countries including Britain as they would have to buy less "carbon intensive" goods and services such as long-haul flights and cars.Prof Anderson said it "would not be easy" to persuade people to reduce their consumption. He said politicians should consider a rationing system similar to the one introduced during the last "time of crisis" in the 1930s and 1940s.This could mean a limit on electricity so people were forced to turn the heating down, turn off the lights and replace old electrical goods such as refrigerators with more efficient models.Food that has travelled from abroad may be limited along with goods that require a lot of energy to manufacture."The Second World War and the concept of rationing is something we need to seriously consider if we are to address the scale of the problem we face," he said.Prof Anderson said that halting growth in the rich world did not necessarily mean a recession or a poorer lifestyle, it just meant making adjustments in everyday life such as using public transport or wearing a jumper rather than turning on the heating."I am not saying we have to go back to living in caves," he said. "Our emissions were a lot less 10 years ago and we got by OK then."Prof Anderson admitted people in the developed world may have to accept a level of "discomfort" by reducing energy and even a "loss of liberty" by travelling less but those changes in lifestyle would prevent worse suffering in the developing world due to   as well as the costs to our own society in the future. "Whatever the cost is of avoiding climate change - and we might think it is high - it's much lower than the costs of not avoiding dangerous climate change," he said.The last round of talks in Copenhagen last year ended in a weak political accord to keep temperature rise below the dangerous tipping point of 2C (3.6F).The Cancun meeting will try to make the deal legally binding and agree targets on cutting emissions.The cupboard is bare We never had it so bad...A typical wartime ration for one adult (per week unless stated) was:Butter: 2oz (55g)Sugar: 8oz (225g)Meat: To the value of 1s. 2d (one shilling and sixpence per week; worth about GBP1.51 in today's money)Milk: Three pints, occasionally down to twoTea: 2oz (56g)Jam: 1lb (450g) every two monthsEggs: One freshDried eggs: One packet every four weeks Sweets and chocolate: 12oz (350g) per person every four weeksSoap: 4oz (113g) per monthPetrol: Approximately 200 miles of travel per month for each carCoal: 2.5 tons per household per yearClothes: 60 coupons to last a year. Later, it was reduced to 48 coupons.About 20 coupons would buy an overcoat or two dresses