Telegraph (London, UK) Monday, November 29, 2010MELTED ARCTIC AND A HALF-METRE SEA RISE: WELCOME TO THE WORLD OF 2060Louise GrayGLOBAL temperatures could increase by 4C (7F) as early as the 2060s, leaving the Artic devoid of ice for parts of the year and raising sea levels around the world.As the latest round of UN climate talks get under way, scientists said that even with strong political will, the chances of changing energy systems fast enough to limit global warming to less than 2C was "slim" and eventual temperature rises of 3C or 4C were much more likely.A study by the UN Environment Programme indicated that the voluntary pledges by countries to curb emissions drawn up in Copenhagen last year would not be sufficient to keep global temperatures from rising by more than 2C -- widely recognised as a level below which dangerous climate change could mostly be avoided.The series of papers published today in a special edition of the Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society A, looked at the impacts of a 4C rise.Scientists from the University of Exeter and the Met Office warned that if high levels of emissions continued that level could be reached by the 2060s.Authors of other papers said land areas warmed more than the oceans, so an overall increase of 4C could lead to higher temperature rises in certain parts of the world, including the northern forests and the Arctic. A series of "thresholds" could be crossed, including the permanent absence of summer ice in the Arctic, loss of most of the tropical coral reefs, melting of the permafrost, which would in turn give out yet more greenhouse gases, and "dieback" of the Amazon forest.Sea levels could rise by half a metre and the cost of protecting coastal areas from the sea could reach GBP173billion a year by 2100, with countries such as Bangladesh and Vietnam having to depend on money from richer countries.One of the main areas to be discussed at this year's talks is the issue of finance for poor countries to help them cope with the impacts of climate change and develop on a low-carbon path, with a figure of GBP60billion a year by 2020 agreed as a goal at last year's talks in Copenhagen.In an article yesterday, David Cameron said Britain's climate change response should not have to suffer because of the austerity measures and the nation could be a "shining example" for other countries to follow.Researchers from Oxford University warned that it was not just by how much the planet warmed that could be dangerous, but the speed, as fast rates could outpace the ability of wildlife and natural systems adapt to the changes.- Oxfam UK said global warming contributed to the deaths of 21,000 people in weather-related disasters in the first nine months of 2010, more than twice the number for the whole of 2009. It said floods in Pakistan and droughts in Russia had been linked to climate change.