The Daily Telegraph (London, UK) Tuesday, June 29, 2010'WE CANNOT GO ON RELYING ON EXPENSIVE FOREIGN FUEL'Louise GrayTo most people, global warming might mean floods and pestilence. To Greg Barker, the Energy and Climate Change Minister, it is first and foremost an opportunity for ''UK plc''.Barker, a former PR executive who took his close friend David Cameron to the Arctic resulting in that infamous snap with the huskies that was dismissed as a cynical stunt by critics, is "100 per cent certain" that man-made global warming is happening.In his Whitehall office, there are two prints from the "husky" set as well as a strategically placed "Save the Planet'' cushion. However, he insists that it's not "all doom and gloom".The 43-year-old believes Britain could become the "Saudi Arabia of renewable energy" by investing in offshore wind, wave and tidal sources. In the Budget, the Coalition pledged to set up a Green Investment Bank to help finance renewable power stations, and Barker has ambitious plans to make London "the world hub of green finance", creating "green ISAs and pensions" so that the public can invest in, and benefit from, the massive growth in the clean energy industry."We are absolutely convinced we have to move rapidly to decarbonise our economy, but we are not in the business of scaremongering. We are in the business of promoting the opportunities this will create for the green economy," he says.This strategy is central to the Government's Green New Deal to reduce our greenhouse gas emissions by 80 per cent on 1990 levels by 2050. If that is to be achieved, between 400,000 and 1.8 million homes a year will have to be upgraded between now and then, at an annual cost of between GBP5billion and GBP15billion.A flagship "pay as you save" scheme will allow people to book a free consultation with an "energy doctor" at a participating supermarket or store. After an energy audit, corrective measures up to a cost of GBP10,000 will be recommended. Home owners will repay the cost over time through savings on their fuel bill, says Mr Barker. Although details are yet to be finalised, the scheme could start as early as next year.He hails this policy as a "completely new radical and ambitious approach to insulating the nation's homes" that will not only help combat climate change by cutting emissions but help cut the average family's fuel bill, which has soared to around GBP1,300 per annum."We have to help families reduce the amount they are spending on electricity and heating their homes, and we will do this by creating a new market," he said. "We will bring new participants into the insulating business, like B&Q, Marks & Spencer or Virgin, as well as trusted energy companies like British Gas and others, to help pay for the upfront cost without the householder having to incur debt on their bills. The cost of upgrading each property will be attached to the energy bill and repaid over 25 years."Mr Barker is committed to cutting carbon emissions but, unlike his predecessors in office, he doesn't dismiss climate-change sceptics as "flatearthers" - there are too many of them on the back benches for him to do that."There are people that take different views. I am not a scientist, but I do understand science is about probabilities. I think, if anything, the slightly preachy tone that some in the climate-change debate have adopted and the rather intolerant tone of those who have genuine concerns is not helpful."But he says the Coalition will continue with Labour's policy on climate change, including cutting carbon emissions by at least 34 per cent by 2020 and pushing for a global deal that could see the target increase to 42 per cent.It will be tough to make such cuts while the Government budget is also being reduced and Liberal Dem colleagues disagree on key matters, such as nuclear energy, but the MP for Bexhill and Battle is a fighter and unafraid to court controversy. Four years ago, the father-of-three was mired in scandal after leaving his wife, Celeste, for a male interior designer. He was also caught up in the MPs' expenses furore, having made GBP320,000 profit on a flat he bought with the help of his taxpayer-funded expenses.In one sense, Barker is ideally placed for his new role, having worked for the Russian oil company Sibneft, once owned by Chelsea FC owner Roman Abramovich. Now, however, he says Britain must reduce dependence on imported oil and gas."I think there are a lot of fool's choices that have been drawn under the last government that are not necessary. To me, energy security, with a diverse supply of clean energy and more efficient use of energy, is something we should be pursuing regardless of whether you are a believer in global warming or not."We cannot as a country go on relying on expensive foreign fuel. We need to have a safe, secure supply of clean energy from a diverse mix of sources."It remains to be seen whether a minister who describes himself as "blue-green" can convince environmentalists that his free-market strategy is the way ahead.Louise Gray is the Daily Telegraph's environment correspondentAnother viewLORD LAWSON of Blaby, one of the most prominent sceptical voices in the climate change debate, has warned that it is "madness" for Britain to try to lead the world in reducing carbon emissions. "We have said with an extraordinary post-imperial arrogance that we are going to show the world what it should do," the former chancellor cautions. "We are going to be a great example. Well, we have been an example of what not to do - by damaging our own economy to no conceivable purpose."While Western countries may be prepared to sign up to swingeing emissions cuts, Lord Lawson believes emerging nations, such as India and China, will never agree to them. It is arrogant of rich nations, such as Britain, to ask them to adopt a policy that might limit economic growth, he says.He acknowledges that the world has grown warmer in the past 100 years, and that it is likely that man-made greenhouse gases "played a part" in that warming. But he believes the science is uncertain: "We need to get off this absurd carbon-cessation hook that will be hugely damaging to the economy and society. What we should be doing is monitoring what is happening very carefully and closely and preparing to adapt to any changes that might occur."The last round of United Nations talks on climate change in Copenhagen at the end of 2009 failed, but the issue came up again at the G8 last weekend, and the UN will resume talks at the end of this year towards getting a global deal. Despite support for a global agreement on climate change among his Tory colleagues, including the Prime Minister, Lord Lawson said it was misguided.He also said domestic policy to cut greenhouse emissions by 80 per cent by 2050 would drive manufacturing abroad and limit growth.However, Chris Huhne, the Energy and Climate Change Secretary, has said Britain would continue the policy of the last administration by committing to cut emissions first before asking poorer countries to take action."Europe must take a lead in securing an international climate agreement, though we can't just click our fingers and hope the rest of the world will follow. We've got to make real emission cuts at home, and work constructively with all other nations in achieving that ambitious deal," he said.