Early cherry blossoms in Washington DC point to
climate crisis



3 avril 2021

Spring has sprung in America’s capital, bringing with it a resplendent bloom of white and
pink cherry blossoms that is one of the city’s grandest annual traditions.

But this year, as Washington DC’s residents embrace a relative return to normal after a
tumultuous year marked by the coronavirus and civil unrest, the earlier-than-anticipated
bloom may point to yet another looming crisis: climate change.

Unusually warm weather in Washington accelerated the bloom cycle of the National
Mall’s 3,800 cherry trees, causing the blossoms to pop days ahead of schedule in what
experts say is a new normal that will make their arrival increasingly difficult to predict.

“Empirical data shows the peak bloom date for the cherry trees is occurring earlier than it
did in the past,” said Mike Litterst, a spokesman for the National Park Service.

Washington’s cherry trees now reach peak bloom about six days sooner than they did 100
years ago. At the same time, weather station measurements in the US capital show the
temperature has increased by 1.6C (2.88F).

“Since heat breaks dormancy in flowering trees, earlier cherry blooming is consistent with
heating caused by climate change, although research has not yet examined all of the
potential factors that could have caused the earlier blooming,” Litterst said.

The trees at the Tidal Basin reached their flowery peak on 28 March, according to the
park service, which defines “peak bloom” as the day when 70% of the Yoshino cherry
blossoms open. On 4 March, the park service predicted peak bloom would fall between 2
April and 5 April.

“The Yoshino cherry trees have reached peak bloom after temperatures well above
average for much of the last week sped us through the final stages of the blossom cycle,”
the agency wrote on Instagram. It added that the warm weather propelled the cherry
blossom buds through the final stages of their six-stage cycle, advancing them from
peduncle elongation – stage 4 – to peak bloom in just four days.

“The four days from peduncle elongation to peak is the fastest the trees have moved
through the last two stages in the last 30 years (matched in 2015),” the agency wrote.

Peak bloom often occurs between the last week of March and the first week of April, but
exceptionally warm or cool temperatures can shift the timeline. This year, peak bloom was
reached four days ahead of the 30-year-average date of 1 April.



In 2020, peak bloom arrived on 20 March, the earliest since 2012 when it also occurred
on that day. The blooms are tied for the third earliest on record. In 2018, peak bloom did
not arrive until 5 April following wicked windstorms and a late-season snow.

Washington’s bloom came just two days after the cherry blossoms in Kyoto reached peak
bloom on 26 March, the earliest in nearly 70-years of formal record keeping – and
possibly ever.

“We can say it’s most likely because of the impact of the global warming,” Shunji Anbe, an
official at the observations division at the Japan Meteorological Agency, told the
Associated Press.

The annual spectacle in Washington typically draws as many as 1.5 million visitors to the
Tidal Basin, but the coronavirus pandemic has dramatically reduced crowd sizes for a
second year in a row. Local officials are urging visitors to wear a mask and practice social
distancing.

To discourage crowds, the park service limited access to the Tidal Basin during the bloom
and urged residents to avoid the area altogether and enjoy the blooms remotely. The Trust
for the National Mall is hosting a live stream of the cherry blossoms.

 

 




