

The New York Times
Late Edition - Final
Editorial, Monday, April 5, 2021 1087 mots, p. A 18

Biden Wants to Spend Billions to Fight Climate Change. It's
Not Enough.

By Farhad Manjoo

His plan is too big to pass, and too small to work.

To hear more audio stories from publishers like The New York Times,

download Audm for iPhone or Android

.

Joe Biden's new infrastructure plan is far and away the most ambitious climate change idea ever proposed
by an American president. Granted this is not an especially high bar: The $2 trillion plan announced on
Wednesday may be the only major climate-focused proposal ever offered by an American president.

Still, Biden's plan absolutely dwarfs the last big spending bill to address the climate, Barack Obama's 2009
stimulus, which provided $90 billion in investments for clean energy. Biden would spend nearly that much
just on public transit. He also calls for $174 billion for electric vehicle infrastructure; $80 billion to improve rail
lines; $50 billion to strengthen essential services against severe weather; and $35 billion for climate-related
research and development.

And that's just on the climate. The White House's fact sheet outlining the complete infrastructure proposal
runs to 27 printed pages on my computer; the word "billion" appears 69 times. Reading through it can feel
like watching a cheesy infomercial or an Oprah giveaway. Here's $400 billion for home care workers, $300
billion for manufacturers, $100 billion for work force development -- but wait, there's more! The electric grid,
water systems, broadband -- you get $100 billion, and you get $100 billion, and you get $100 billion!

What I'm saying is, Biden's proposal is gargantuan. And if a version manages to pass Congress at anywhere
near its current scope, it would constitute a historic level of spending to mitigate the climate crisis   and
improve basic American services to a level above "crumbling."

Yet here is the stark shame of our current political moment: Huge as it sounds, the Biden plan is not nearly
big enough. Rather than inspiring optimism, then, the vast size of the proposal sets up a disheartening
conundrum for anyone looking forward to a habitable future on this fragile planet: Any plan bold enough to
effectively address climate change seems unlikely to survive the American political system. And any bill that
can survive our politics may not make enough of a dent on the climate.

A 2019 estimate by the Roosevelt Institute suggests it will take about $1 trillion in spending per year over at
least 10 years to achieve a carbon-neutral American economy; several other estimates come to a similar
conclusion. Part of the investment is likely to come from the private sector, but most will need to be from the
government. Biden's proposal is just a ﬁfth of what the institute estimates is the minimum amount that the
government needs to spend to stave off the worst projected dangers of a warming climate; at the high end
of spending projections, it's only an eighth.

Republicans are already balking at the cost of Biden's plan -- or, more precisely, they're balking at the
prospect of raising taxes on corporations to pay for it. Last month Democrats passed Biden's $1.9 trillion
Covid-19 recovery plan, and a huge infrastructure proposal seems to poll well with voters. But congressional
Democrats from different factions are already calling for big changes to various parts of the plan, and the
party doesn't have much room to lose support in either the House or the Senate.

It isn't just climate change that might be left behind when Congress is done chewing up Biden's plan. I spent
much of Wednesday afternoon talking about  Biden's   ideas   with   advocates   for   public   transit   and   other
environmentally friendly transportation systems. They were giddy about the boldness of Biden's proposals,
especially its recognition that the nation is far too dependent on cars.

 





Among the bright spots: The plan calls for $115 billion in spending on roads and bridges, but unlike many
previous highway-funding proposals, Biden's plan emphasizes repairing roads before expanding them or
building new ones. This is crucial because one of every ﬁve miles of roadway in America is rated in poor
condition -- but when given federal money for roads, states often spend a lot of it on expansion rather than
repair.


This is counterproductive. New roads are often justiﬁed as a way to reduce trafﬁc, but that's not how trafﬁc
works -- new and expanded roads tend to encourage more driving, just making congestion worse. New
roads also make for more maintenance, adding to the backlog of repairs.

Another novelty in a federal highway bill is the proposal's emphasis on road safety. It includes $20 billion to
reduce crashes and fatalities "especially for cyclists and pedestrians," constituencies that are often forgotten
about in spending for cars. The plan also outlines many ideas to address racial equity, including a $20 billion
program to redress the practice of building highways through Black neighborhoods.

But at the moment, Biden's big ideas exist mainly as a fact sheet -- there is no written bill yet, and in the
sausage-making of transportation legislation, ambitious ideas are often left behind.

"Whether what they write at every step matches their rhetoric, that is the real question," said Beth Osborne,
the director of Transportation for America, an advocacy group. Osborne served as the deputy assistant
secretary for transportation policy in the Obama administration, and she notes that Obama too called for
repairing roads before expanding them. But she regrets that Obama's progressive rhetoric on transportation
policy did not translate to progressive legislation.

"Congress and the administration have been left off the hook -- but no one ever called them on it, and no
one ever does," she told me. "I'm hoping this time they do."

I am too. I plan to watch the process closely and I promise to throw a columnistic tantrum if the promises
aren't   met.   But   it   will   likely   take   many   months   for   a   version   of   the   package   to   wend   its   way   through
Congress, and public interest is likely to die down through the long slog. Given the mismatch between the
scale of the crisis and the political will to do something big, I can't say I'm very hopeful.

