

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Monday, February 1, 2021 346 mots, p. 8

Global warming threatens England's mountain hares

By Max Stephens

ENGLAND'S last surviving mountain hares are at risk because of global warming, conservation groups warn.

Studies suggest there are only 2,500 left in the Peak District. The People's Trust for Endangered Species say
"the hares could be in trouble", after experts found declining populations.

Climate change was threatening the creatures' survival, making summers too warm and reducing food
sources such as heather, the trust said.

Reduced snowfall meant the hares, with their white fur, had lost their ability to blend in with winter scenery.

Nida al-Fulaij, a manager at the People's Trust for Endangered Species, said: "The Peak District's altitude and
colder climate is ideal habitat for mountain hares, which have adapted perfectly. But with the onset of
warmer and more erratic weather, these hares could be in trouble."

The trust hopes the study's soon-tobe published ﬁndings will help with the successful reintroduction of the
"shy, but striking" species, as well as safe guard those remaining.

Carlos Bedson, a biologist from Manchester Metropolitan University, leading the research, said: "Mountain
hares are effectively an ice age Arctic animal and it is a privilege to see one in England, surviving here at
lower latitudes."

He added it was amazing to think that in normal times "you could be working in your ofﬁce or school or
factory, and then drive to the Peak District and go out and have an Arctic wildlife exploration experience".

Mountain hares, a sister species to the Arctic hare, died out in England during the last ice age but managed
to survive in Scotland.

Landowners in the 1870s did attempt to reintroduce them to England but only those in the Peak District
survived.

The hare's fur turns from brown in summer to white in winter, which led early biologists to believe they ate
snow to turn white. In fact, it related to differences in daylight and air temperature, which stopped them
producing brown melanin in their fur.
 


