

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
Business, Thursday, March 18, 2021 471 mots, p. 1

Business

Climate change ﬁght to pile higher costs on British
businesses

By Rachel Millard and Alan Tovey

COMPANIES face higher costs under plans to tackle climate change that could force many more ﬁrms to pay
for their carbon emissions.

The Government has unveiled a substantial package of proposals to encourage industries from steel-making
to car-making and pharmaceuticals to slash their carbon dioxide output.

Proposals include extending the emissions trading scheme to other sectors of the economy beyond the aviation, power generation and certain other heavy energy users to which it has applied.

Ministers did not set out speciﬁcs but it is thought the scheme could eventually cover farming, which along
with land use accounts for about 12pc of the UK's annual emissions, or 67 million tonnes.

The move is among efforts that could compel companies to label products with their carbon content, swap
natural gas for hydrogen and install carbon capture systems.

The Government said industry needed to to cut emissions by at least two-thirds by 2035 and by 90pc by 2050
compared with 2018 levels.

That will help the UK meet its legally binding target to cut national emissions to net zero by 2050, but the
plans are likely to be controversial with many businesses already saddled with high energy costs.

The Government concedes that "in many cases, the ﬁnancial cost of making low carbon industrial products
will be higher than the carbon intensive production methods used now".

Ana Musat, head of policy at Aldersgate Group - a coalition of businesses including Siemens and National
Grid - said: "Industry is really willing to play its part but in terms of the additional costs that are incurred there
needs to be a policy framework that allows them to remain competitive."

The UK's emissions trading scheme was set up after Britain left the EU scheme due to Brexit. Businesses in
sectors covered by the scheme are allowed to emit a ﬁxed amount and must have permits to cover those
emissions.

They can buy and trade the permits from others and can be allocated free permits by the Government.

In the new Industrial Decarbonisation Strategy released yesterday the Government said it wanted to "use
carbon pricing as a tool to send a clear market signal" and would review the emissions trading scheme next
year.

"This will include consulting on a net zero consistent emissions cap; reviewing the long-term role of free
allowances; exploring expanding the scope of the scheme to cover more sectors of the economy and linking
with other schemes internationally."

Energy minister Anne-Marie Trevelyan said: "The work we do in the next decade will be essential to ensure
industry can ﬂourish during its transition to net zero, without moving emissions and businesses abroad."

