

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
Business, Thursday, February 11, 2021 1226 mots, p. 2

Business

Conservatives must not surrender post-Brexit climate policy
to Left
Markets will drive carbon prices but the Chancellor should be prepared to pay out a tax
bonus to public

AMBROSE EVANS-PRITCHARD

There is a beautifully simple "market" way to lift the price of carbon, and there is a very bad interventionist
way. Choose the wrong one and you squander public consent for the net-zero transition.

Emmanuel Macron learnt this to his cost and has never fully recovered. The Gilets Jaunes began as a protest
against fuel taxes, and mushroomed into a cultural uprising by a neglected France profonde against a
metropolitan Paris elite that speaks with a different ideological accent.

The UK must not repeat that mistake as the Government draws up plans for its post-Brexit climate strategy.
Leaks suggest that the Treasury sees a carbon tax as money for the taking. Subtler statecraft is required.

The good way to keep the public on side is a rising carbon fee imposed on emitters that is handed back to
every household as a cash dividend. There is already such a blueprint in the US Congress (HR 763) backed by
all former chiefs of the US Federal Reserve and Nobel economists from Keynesian Left to free-market Right.

The fee starts at $15 a ton and ratchets up $10 every year until the task is done. The higher the fee, the bigger
the citizen bonus.

The   late   climate   entrepreneur   Ted   Halstead   argued   that   such   a   dividend   is   the   answer   for   political
conservatives to an issue that has been surrendered to the Left. If you want to gain democratic traction fast,
pay the ﬁrst Climate Bonus in advance as an aperitif. The price signal does the work without the need for a
dirigiste bureaucracy picking technology winners and losers, or overpromising with green new deals that are
never what they seem to be. Ursula von der Leyen's variant relies a lot on Putin's gas pipeline. Canada's
provinces have been experimenting with a carbon fee and dividend for years. Ottawa introduced a national
fee in 2018 starting at C$20, rising to C$50 by 2022, and in theory reaching C$170 by 2030 - but that will never
be necessary. Roughly 90pc is returned to households as a dividend. The rebate last year for a family of four
was C$888 (£506) in Alberta. The poorest 60pc of the population saw a net transfer on average because their
carbon footprint is lower. The fuel poverty argument collapses. The European Commission aims to siphon off
EU carbon revenues for its own use, much as Stuart kings used the Royal

African Company to secure an income without having to rely on Parliament. The funds will not be rotated
back to the people. They will be used for institutional empire building. The Treasury itch in this country is to
use the money to help plug big holes left by the pandemic, but that is to confuse objectives. A well-managed
transition to net-zero will create its own bonanza of cascading riches and revenue, but ﬁrst you have to get
the politics right.

The Citizens Climate Lobby says Britain should stop following the EU's emissions trading scheme - better
than it was but still full of exemptions - and instead go full throttle for the fee and dividend model. It should
act with the agility shown in the vaccine campaign.

"Coming out of Brexit, we can do what we want," said Wolfram Moebius, from the UK steering committee.
"The dividend should be as visible as possible. People need to see their cheque in the post."

The Prime Minister has wisely vetoed a meat and butter tax. Such a deranged scheme plays to fears that
carbon abatement means giving up everything we like, the hair shirt future of Extinction Rebellion. No such
sacriﬁce is needed or desirable. Capitalism will solve the climate crisis more efﬁciently - and more quickly -
than austerity can ever achieve.



 



The International Monetary Fund estimates that green investment and a rising carbon price would together
lift global GDP by an extra 0.7pc over 15 years. It is a macroeconomic gain. It puts excess capital to work with
a relatively high multiplier effect.


It was long assumed carbon prices must rise to several hundred dollars to change behaviour. No longer.
Green technology keeps lowering the tariff, and there are swathes of activity where even a modest nudge in
prices has a radical outcome. A paper for Nature Climate Change argued $20 would mitigate much global
deforestation, and $50 would largely stop it.

Coal was driven out of the UK market once carbon prices reached $30.

Thresholds vary by region but new wind and solar are already cheaper than new coal for two-thirds of the
world's population, according to Bloomberg New Energy Finance. Any carbon price would soon render
existing coal plants obsolete almost everywhere.

The Stern-Stiglitz High-Level Commission on Carbon Prices three years ago opted for a range of $40-80,
rising to $50-100 by 2030. Facts on the ground have already run ahead.

"We   think   $50   will   do   the   job.   All   you   need   is   a   realistic   signal   and   markets   will   come   forward   with
technologies nobody has even thought of," said Kingsmill Bond, from Carbon Tracker.

Markets have already delivered.

They have cut the cost of solar panels by 90pc in a decade. Strike prices on North Sea wind dropped from
£150 per MW/h to £39.50 in ﬁve years, with more to come. Energy storage is tracking the same cost curve
with a lag. So is green hydrogen, so is closed-loop geothermal, so is carbon capture, and so are nuclear
batteries. Electric vehicles will reach purchase cost parity with fossil cars by 2022-2024. Cheaper running
costs will then lead to an avalanche. No carbon price is even needed. What remains - minus farming - are the
tough nuts of heating, cement, steel, chemicals, haulage, ships, and aircraft. Each is reachable at some price
and, where not, a sledgehammer works ﬁne. If you mandate that a rising share of jet fuel must be zero-
carbon (derived from green hydrogen) the market will create the supply. Costs will plummet with scale.
"Market principles are going to let us move faster than anybody ever imagined. CEOs have discovered that
there's   a   lot   of   money   to   be   made   out   of   this   transition,"   said   John   Kerry,   America's   new   climate
generalissimo.

Indeed, they have. Big Money has switched sides. It is pulling the plug on companies that have no business
plan for life after fossils. It is lavishing attention on the new climate titans instead. One can understand why
the Treasury has its eye on climate revenues, but it does not need the money as urgently as supposed.

Pandemic costs are already being paid in part by expropriating bondholders with negative real yields. The
long-tail legacy costs can wait.

Britain should opt for the Smithian purity of a tax-neutral carbon price, and let others bluster about green
deals. That would be the proper showpiece for COP26 in Glasgow, where Adam Smith taught the world.


