

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
Business, Thursday, March 25, 2021 345 mots, p. 2

Business

Climate policy revamp task for Bank and FCA raises
eyebrows

By Tom Rees

THE City watchdog and a core part of the Bank of England have been handed new climate policy remits as
they became the latest to be swept up by the Treasury's green drive.

The Financial Conduct Authority and the Prudential Regulation Authority's efforts to regulate the City will
have to consider the Government's goal to reach a net zero economy by 2050.

However, questions were raised over how the two regulators will revamp policy as the Treasury widened its
push to green Britain's ﬁnancial institutions ahead of the COP26 summit. The PRA, set up after the ﬁnancial
crisis, is primarily tasked with overseeing the stability of the ﬁnancial system. "It's great that they've done it
but we need to make sure that it actually translates into concrete action," said Simon Youel, head of policy at
Positive Money. "We need to see more of the details of what exactly this is going to mean and look like for
regulation… The ball's in their court in how they interpret it." The Treasury said the Government wants to
mobilise "private ﬁnance behind sustainable" growth and "ensure every ﬁnancial decision takes climate
change into account". It has already given the Bank's monetary and ﬁnancial policy committees an eco-
friendly mandate ahead of the UK's hosting of the COP26 summit in Glasgow later this year.

The PRA is already behind the Bank's climate stress tests on banks and insurers but delayed the ﬁndings due
to Covid-19. Giving the Bank's monetary policy committee a green goal was criticised by former governor
Lord King earlier this month.

He warned that changing the Bank's policy to consider climate aims is a "slippery slope to undermining the
inde pendence of the Bank".

"What seems a harmless gesture today may prove damaging tomorrow," he said. "I know climate change
arouses passions, but that is no reason to embroil the Bank of England in what should be the responsibility of
Government."

'What seems like a harmless gesture today may prove to be more damaging tomorrow.'
