

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Saturday, February 20, 2021 776 mots, p. 15

Review

Smile! Tech will ﬁx it
Bill Gates delivers that rare thing: a cheerful book about climate change, which says we can
have it all. But is it wishful thinking?

By Emma GATTEN

HOW TO AVOID A CLIMATE DISASTER by Bill Gates 272pp, Allen Lane, T £16.99 (0844 871 1514), RRP £20,
ebook £9.99 .....

Climate change narratives tend towards doom, gloom and upheaval. Disaster is coming, and stopping it will
require a fundamental reshaping of our lives, and perhaps even of the global capitalist system. That message
has reached a critical mass in recent years.

But as climate change has hit the mainstream agenda it has spurred some new ways of thinking from those
who accept that something must be done, but who are hoping it doesn't require a revolution. Now Bill Gates
is here to tell you that you can have it all; consumption, growth and manageable sea levels. He's just not
exactly sure how yet.

How to Avoid a Climate Disaster starts from Gates's overarching belief that things are going pretty well for
humankind, all told, so long as we iron out some wrinkles. In Gates's world, climate change is deﬁnitely one
of the bigger wrinkles, but still a surmountable challenge that can be met with the right policy and, most
importantly, some snazzy tech ﬁxes.

It's easy to get exercised by the impending catastrophe of climate change. One paper released in 2019 was so
doom-mongering it reportedly drove people into therapy. You're unlikely to be similarly agitated by Gates's
book, unless you feel heart palpitations at the thought of cutting edge battery technology and smart devices
(some people, I know, do). He runs through the solutions we already have in our grasp - mainly the switch to
renewables and electric vehicles.

There's little in this that will surprise anyone with a vague awareness of cli mate policy, and quite a lot
missing. His overview of food production, in particular, ignores developments in regenerative agriculture,
indoor farming, and our understanding of the importance of farmland biodiversity.

Throughout   the   book,   the   narrow   focus   on   ﬁxing   greenhouse   gas   emissions   comes   at   the   expense   of
concern over the impact on our rapidly depleting ecosystems, despite a

REUTERS growing recognition that the fates of the two are intertwined.

But Gates, who has worked for 20 years on projects to alleviate global poverty, is laser focused on human
welfare. And having it all has to work for everyone, the developing world included. It's not enough to work out
how we feed the world on current diets in a sustainable way. We should expect the developing world to
catch up with our consumption of meat and dairy, though one recent study suggests this would require six
Earths.

Behaviour   change   is   largely   off   the   agenda   here.   We're   not   going   to   substantially   trim   our   meat   consumption, drive less, or pay more for our energy, argues Gates, so there's no point going down that route. Not
only that, but we'll have to work out how to accommodate billions more people doing the same. That leaves
some big gaps to ﬁll, for which Gates's answer is largely technology that we don't yet have. He is cautious
here to distance himself from the idea that the climate optimists' great white hope, direct air capture of
carbon dioxide (in which he has heavily invested), is going to save us.

But he still leaves us hanging on how we're going to meet some of the great challenges ahead of us. On
chemical fertilisers, for instance, there's no question poorer countries should be using more, though we have
no way of capturing their greenhouse gas emissions.



 



Despite not having the answers, Gates is asking the right questions, which many of his fellow optimists tend
to overlook. Two thirds of the global economy are committed to a net zero plan, and policymakers are already
involved in many of the conundrums that Gates lays out: how to ensure a steady power supply as you make
the switch to renewable energy; how to incentivise the use of electric vehicles; how to shift whole cities off
the gas grid.


But Gates is concerned with how to ensure developing countries, many of which will be worse hit by the
impact of climate change created by richer nations, do not get left behind. That's not just a moral question;
without alternatives they will have no choice but to embed the same polluting behaviours as industrialised
nations did. The UK may be smug about its net zero goals, and its rapid decarbonisation. But, as with a
pandemic, we will eventually come to realise we're all in it together.


