

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Friday, March 5, 2021 505 mots, p. 10

Pride and Prejudice estate at risk from climate change

By Olivia Rudgard environment correSpondent

COLIN FIRTH's Mr Darcy caused hearts to ﬂutter when he emerged from a lake at Lyme Park, Cheshire,
during the BBC's Pride and Prejudice.

But the famous estate is under threat from climate change and could be irreparably damaged in just a few
decades without preventative action, the National Trust has said.

The number of its sites at risk from a changing climate is expected to more than double by 2060, the charity
warned. Among those facing irreparable damage is the country mansion used as the setting for Pemberley
in the 1995 adaptation of Jane Austen's novel.

The Grade I listed country house is already under threat from ﬂoodwater and suffered a major ﬂood in 2019,
prompting the charity to plant trees on nearby moorlands in an attempt to protect the 16th century mansion
and its surrounding deer park.

The charity has mapped the climate risks faced by different sites and properties across the UK in order to
more effectively protect them.

If climate change is left unchecked, the number at high or medium risk of climate-related hazards could
increase from 20,457 today to 47,888 in 2060, out of a total 67,426 sites.

Other threats include invasive pests and diseases, heat damage, and land slides and coastal erosion.

Harry Bowell, National Trust director of land and nature, said: "This map is a game changer in how we face
the threat climate change poses to the places we care for.

"While the data draws on a worst- case scenario, the map paints a stark picture of what we have to prepare
for. But by acting now, and working with nature, we can adapt to many of these risks. One of the most
exciting   opportunities   here   is   the   map   ensures   a   joine-dup   approach   in   which   neighbours,   landowners,
charities and developers can come together to identify risks and collectively intervene to tackle issues and
make large-scale change.

"Planting trees, restoring peatlands, slowing the ﬂow of water in ﬂood-prone river valleys and preparing our
places and collections for the increased heat and humidity are some of the measures this map can inform."

Other properties at risk of damage from ﬂooding include Fountains Abbey in Ripon, North Yorks, which the
charity hopes to protect in a £2.5million project to slow the ﬂow of the River Skell.

Natural landmarks under threat from coastal erosion include Birling Gap in East Sussex and the Giant's
Causeway in Northern Ireland.

Endangered sites National Trust forecasts trouble

Lyme Park, Cheshire Under signiﬁcant threat from ﬂooding caused by dry spells followed by heavy rain. Ham
House, London Gardens under threat from rising temperatures, with regular 40C days expected by 2040.

Long Mynd, Shropshire The heath and moorland in the Shropshire Hills has lost up to three quarters of its
heather due to drought and damage caused by the heather beetle. Brownsea Island, Dorset The island has
experienced signiﬁcant coastal erosion.

