

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Tuesday, February 9, 2021 361 mots, p. 7

Cumbria coal mine 'breaches climate pact'

By Emma Gatten ENVIRONMENT EDITOR

THE UK's ﬁrst deep coal mine in decades leaves Britain at risk of breaking the Paris Agreement if it goes
ahead, climate scientists have told Boris Johnson.

Lars   Nilsson,   a   professor   at   Lund   University   who   contributed   to   the   latest   report   from   the   UN's
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, is one of 13 experts to have written to the Prime

Minister calling for him to intervene to stop the £165million West Cumbria coal mine, near Whitehaven.

The mine was approved last year by Cumbria county council, and will supply coking coal for steel production
in the UK and for export before it closes by 2049.

Critics say the mine will undermine the UK's efforts to reach net zero by 2050 and its role as a climate change
leader ahead of COP26.

The Government's climate change advisers, the CCC, have criticised the decision by Robert Jenrick, the
Housing Secretary, to decline to intervene in the matter, on the grounds that it was a local issue for Cumbria.

In the letter to the Prime Minister, the 13 international climate and energy experts say it is also in conﬂict with
the UK's obligation to try to limit global warming to 1.5C, in accordance with the Paris Agreement.

"In order to limit global average temperature rises to 1.5C, global emissions must peak by 2030 (sooner for the
UK and other industrialised nations) and then decline rapidly after this date," the letter says.

"It is clearly inconsistent for the UK government to claim that development of a coal mine, intended to fuel
emissions for almost three decades, is not a matter for national consideration," it adds. The group also says
the mine is incompatible with legal commitments to reach net zero under the Climate Change Act.

The Government has defended the mine on the basis that it reduces the need for imports to supply the
British steel industry, though the CCC says 85 per cent of the coal will be exported and have called for the UK
to phase out its use by 2035.

'It is inconsistent to claim the mine is not a matter of national consideration'

 


