

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Saturday, February 6, 2021 379 mots, p. 8

Global warming 'helped virus-carrying bats ﬂourish'

By Sarah Knapton science editor

CLIMATE change may have helped to drive the emergence of coronavirus, scientists have suggested.

Researchers at Cambridge University and the Potsdam Institute for Climate Impact Research in Germany
looked for hotspots where the changing climate has allowed bat species to ﬂourish.

They found that the southern Chinese province of Yunnan has seen some of the biggest changes which
have likely led to an extra 40 species of bats.

Previous studies have shown that the greater diversity in bat species allows for more coronavirus to emerge.

Given that each bat carries an average of 2.67 coronaviruses, the experts estimate that about 100 more
viruses are now circulating in Yunnan com pared with the start of the 20th century.

Although Yunnan is around 120 miles distance from Wuhan, where the outbreak began, it is thought the
ancestral   virus   may   have   ﬁrst   evolved   there   and   could   have   been   exported   through   the   trafﬁcking   of
pangolins.

Dr Robert Beyer, a researcher at Cambridge's department of zoology, said: "Climate change over the last
century has made the habitat in the southern Chinese Yunnan province suitable for more bat species.

"Understanding how the global distribution of bat species has shifted as a result of climate change may be
an important step in reconstructing the origin of the Covid-19 outbreak.

"As climate change altered habitats, species left some areas and moved into others - taking their viruses with
them.

"This not only altered the regions where viruses are present, but most likely allowed for new interactions
between animals and viruses, causing more harmful viruses to be transmitted or evolve."

However, experts commenting on the research said other factors than climate change were also likely to
have played a role in the virus's emergence.

Kate   Jones,   professor   of   ecology   and   biodiversity   at   University   College   London,   said:   "Climate change
certainly has a role to play in changing species distributions to increase ecological hazard.

"However, it may turn out that increases in human populations, human movement and degrading natural
environments through agricultural expansion have a more important role."

The study was published in the journal Science of the Total Environment.

2.67 The average number of coronaviruses carried by a bat. A greater diversity in the species allows more
viruses to emerge


 


