 Steven Morris 16 décembre 2021 Good citizen award? No thanks, young climate campaigners tell Welsh council theguardian.com/environment/2021/dec/16/good-citizen-award-pontypridd-young-campaigners Most youngsters chosen to receive a good citizen award would probably have welcomed the recognition and dutifully attended the ceremony and photocall with the local mayor. But members of Young Friends of the Earth in the south Wales town of Pontypridd, who have been campaigning for changes to address the climate emergency, weren’t having any of it. They turned down the award from Rhondda Cynon Taf county borough council (RCT) on the basis that the local authority needed to do much more to tackle the very real environmental issues faced in their area, which was devastated by flooding last year. “We felt RCT wasn’t doing enough about climate change,” said one of the members, Alice Hanks-Doyle, 13. “It would have been hypocritical of us to accept the award. The council says they are planning stuff to help but if a fire is burning, you don’t say: ‘I plan to do this tomorrow.’ You don’t sit in the flames, you sort it out. They are sitting in the flames. “The floods were horrible. I look out of the window and think in 10 years I may be next to the beach. The sea levels are rising, flooding is more frequent and people brush it under the carpet. I go outside after school and the air doesn’t feel fresh. Can I have fresh air please? Not an award.” Young Friends of the Earth Pontypridd’s message to Rhondda Cynon Taf county borough council The group, which has a core of about eight members, was also savvy enough to know that it might get more publicity for its cause if it turned down the award. They viewed a YouTube clip of the moment in the film Brassed Off when band leader Danny turns down a prize to draw attention to the plight of ravaged mining communities and explains: “Us winning this trophy won’t mean bugger all to most people. But us refusing it … then it becomes news.” Dan Wright, 12, said: “If we had accepted the award, we might have got in the local paper. More people now will know what we’ve done. Perhaps they’ll join us on a march or do their own research on the climate. When I first heard about the award I felt excited but then thought they were trying to greenwash themselves.” The council wrote to the group explaining that the good citizen awards were presented to “a small number” of people. A time and place was given for them to pick up their certificate and have their photos taken by the council’s photographer.  The children wrote back politely thanking the council but said they were not impressed at what RCT was doing to tackle the climate emergency. The climate disaster is here – this is what the future looks like They flagged up that roads were still being built, suggested many more trees could be planted and expressed concern that pension funds have been invested in businesses that profit from fossil fuels. The children concluded: “We did not start protesting to get awards, but because the people in positions of power were not acting. Accepting would be saying that we think RCT council is doing enough to protect our future – and it scares us that you are not.” Andrew Morgan, the leader of the council, wrote back explaining the council had committed to being net zero by 2030. He set out a long list of measures that were being taken, explaining why it was still necessary to build some roads and how the council had worked hard to invest pension funds in more environmentally friendly ways. He also said they were exploring how trees and peat bogs could be used to capture and store carbon. An RCT council spokesperson said: “The council was disappointed to hear that Young Friends of the Earth, Pontypridd felt that they were unable to accept the mayor’s good citizen award. The award was granted in recognition of the hard work that they undertake, as they help to raise awareness and put climate change at the forefront of people’s minds. “The council understands that they are passionate about making a change and it indeed shares this passion and has recently launched its “Think Climate RCT’ campaign to support its commitment to Climate Change in RCT.” Another FoE campaigner, Rowan Moon, 10, was not swayed. He said he still felt traumatised by the floods. “It could happen again. We have to prepare.” Asked what he thought of RCT’s response, he echoed Greta Thunberg’s dismissal of global leaders’ promises: “Blah, blah, blah.”