

The New York Times (web site)
Tuesday, March 16, 2021 -  1546 mots

The Rock Standing in the Way of China’s Climate Ambitions:
Coal

By Chris Buckley

Beijing’s new development blueprint is meant to steer the country to carbon neutrality before 2060, but
companies and regions dependent on the fossil fuel aren’t making it easy.

Xi   Jinping,   China’s   top   leader,   has   promoted   an   uplifting   vision   for   growth   increasingly   freed   from
greenhouse gas pollution, but turning that plan into action is already proving contentious.

The big issue is coal.

Mr. Xi’s climate-saving ambitions are a pillar of a plan for the country’s post-pandemic ascent that was
endorsed by China’s Communist Party-controlled legislature days ago.

The plan is designed to steer the country toward two signature commitments that Mr. Xi made last year.
China’s emissions of carbon dioxide would peak before 2030, he said, and the country would reach net
carbon neutrality before 2060, meaning it would emit no more of the greenhouse gas than it takes from the
atmosphere by methods like engineering or planting forests.

But unusually sharp debate has risen in China over how aggressively it should cut the use of coal, which has
fueled its industrial takeoff yet made it the world’s top-polluting nation in recent decades.

Prominent Chinese climate scientists and policy advisers want stricter emissions limits, including virtually no
new coal power projects, and they foresee a boom in solar and wind generation. Powerful provinces, state
companies and industry groups say China still needs to use large amounts of coal for electricity and industry
for years to come.

“There is absolutely a tension,” said Leon Clarke, a professor at the University of Maryland and a leading co-
author of a recent study on China’s options for curtailing emissions. “On the one side, there’s a sense that
coal has driven the economy and you don’t want to give that up. On the other hand, coal is the biggest
target for climate action, particularly in the near term.”

China’s environmental pressures were brought to life last week as a thick smog hung over Beijing, reﬂecting
an uptick in industrial pollution.

Friction over fossil fuels goes back years in China, and the issue is far from unique to that country. But China’s
looming choices have outsize consequences for greenhouse gas levels and international negotiations.

The country’s annual carbon dioxide emissions are 28 percent of the global total, roughly the same as the
next three biggest emitters combined: the United States, the European Union and India. The accumulated
emissions of the United States and other rich economies across the entire industrial era, though, remain
much bigger than China’s.

Representatives of the coal industry attending the national legislative session in Beijing argued that China
needs to keep burning coal, albeit in cleaner, more efﬁcient plants.

The China National Coal Association issued a report this month proposing modest increases in its use for the
next ﬁve years, reaching 4.2 billion metric tons by 2025, and also said China should create three to ﬁve
“globally competitive world-class coal enterprises.”

“The   principal   status   of   coal   in   our   national   energy   system,   and   its   role   as   ballast,   will   not   shift,”   the
association said in an earlier position paper about the industry’s outlook in the next ﬁve years.

Provincial governments have recently proposed more new coal mines and power plants, while vowing that
their projects will limit emissions. In answer to the call for a carbon peak, Shanxi Province, one of China’s
biggest coal producing areas, announced plans for 40 “green,” efﬁcient coal mines.

 





Chinese ofﬁcials in such areas also worry about losses of jobs and investment and the resulting social strains.
They argue that China still needs coal to provide a robust base of power to complement solar, wind and
hydropower sources, which are more prone to ﬂuctuating. And many energy companies backing these views
are state-owned behemoths that have easy access to political leaders.


“Local governments see coal power as a robust energy shield,” Lu Zhonglou, a Chinese businessman who
sold his coal mines a few years ago and still keeps an eye on the industry, said in a telephone interview. “You
can’t write off coal too early.”

But proponents of China’s green transition, including government advisers, argue that rapidly abandoning
fossil   fuels   and   shifting   from   old-school   heavy   industry   will   beneﬁt   growth,   innovation,   health   and   the
environment. Some say China can ramp up wind and solar sources and reach a carbon peak much earlier
than 2030, which would lower the costs and technological hurdles of reaching carbon neutrality.

“A lot of heavy lifting is being left for the time after 2030,” said Lauri Myllyvirta, who monitors Chinese climate
and energy policies as the lead analyst at the Center for Research on Energy and Clean Air in Helsinki. “The
central contradiction between expanding the smokestack economy and promoting green growth appears
unresolved.”

China’s new plan appears to give the different camps in the carbon debate a foothold. The plan promises
green growth and expansion of hydro, solar and wind power, in addition to nuclear power plant construction.
By 2025, the plan says, non-fossil fuel sources will provide one-ﬁfth of China’s energy.

Yet the plan also appeared to hearten defenders of coal and disappoint environmental groups and climate
policy experts. It did not include an absolute ceiling on annual carbon dioxide emissions and indicated that
coal-ﬁred power stations would keep being built.

“Many areas still believe that before 2030 they can keep substantially increasing fossil fuel use,” Wang Jinnan,
the president of the government’s Chinese Academy of Environmental Planning and a senior member of the
national legislature, said in an interview with a Chinese magazine posted on the academy’s website. “This will
have a big negative impact on China reaching carbon neutrality before 2060.”

Mr. Xi may face calls from abroad to offer more ways to curb emissions as China turns the plan into actual
policies. For China, action on climate change is also a way of building good will, including with the United
States and the European Union.

The crucial questions are not just when will China’s emissions peak, but how high will they reach and how
long they will take to fall drastically.

An   international   pact   to   limit   global warming   this   century   to   below   2   degrees   Celsius   (3.6   degrees
Fahrenheit), and to 1.5 degrees Celsius if possible, is not possible without more urgent efforts from China and
the other major powers to reach carbon neutrality by around midcentury.

“The longer the delay, the harder it is to achieve those midcentury targets. It’s just math,” said Kelly Sims
Gallagher, a professor at the Fletcher School of Tufts University who studies China’s climate policies. China’s
plan, she said, “will not have the effect of injecting new momentum into the global climate negotiations.”

Mr. Xi has a political stake in the issues. He has promoted himself and China as guardians of an “ecological
civilization” and has made cleaning China’s air, water and soil a basis for public appeal. When he announced
China’s pledge last year to curtail greenhouse gas emissions, he also called for a “green recovery” from the
Covid-19 pandemic.

China’s air pollution has eased markedly in recent years. Mr. Xi created environmental inspection teams to
pressure ofﬁcials usually ﬁxated on economic and political goals. The inspectors ﬂashed their teeth early this
year when they issued strikingly blunt criticisms of the National Energy Administration, which helps oversee
power plant approvals.

“Environmental protection has not been given the high priority it should be accorded,” the inspectors wrote
in their report on the administration. They criticized the administration for letting coal power projects go
ahead   in   eastern   China,   where   stringent   pollution   limits   are   supposed   to   apply.   In   recent   days,   the
environmental authorities also cracked down on steel makers in Tangshan, a northern industrial city, that
were found breaking pollution curbs, including submitting fake data.



But China’s post-Covid recovery has been far from pristine. After emissions fell in the ﬁrst months of last year,

 



when China’s outbreak was at its worst, they climbed back up as spending on infrastructure and industry
lifted the economy, as well as coal use. China’s approvals for new coal plants have picked up in the past
couple of years, and more are in the pipeline.


In the end, China’s greenhouse gas emissions increased by 1.7 percent in 2020 relative to the previous year,
the only major economy to show a rise that year, according to the Rhodium Group, an economic research
ﬁrm.

To transit away from coal, China must confront the costs of closing mines and plants, including the needs of
millions of potentially displaced miners and other workers. Many coal-dependent regions and their workers
seem unprepared for that possible shift.

“I’ve never thought about the coal mine shutting down, never thought about leaving,” Gui Lianjun, a 39-year
old miner in Shenmu, a coal city in northwest China, said by telephone. He sounded nonplused when asked
about the link between coal and global warming.

“The government close down a mine because of global warming? I don’t think that’s possible,” he said. “I’ve
never heard of that reason.”

Liu Yi contributed research.



 


