

The New York Times (web site)
Thursday, March 25, 2021 -  1181 mots

Riders Are Abandoning Buses and Trains. That’s a Problem
for Climate Change.

By Somini Sengupta, Geneva Abdul, Manuela Andreoni and Veronica Penney

Public transit offers a simple way for cities to lower greenhouse gas emissions, but the pandemic has pushed
ridership, and revenue, off a cliff in many big systems.

On the London Underground, Piccadilly Circus station is nearly vacant on a weekday morning, while the
Delhi Metro is ferrying fewer than half of the riders it used to. In Rio, unpaid bus drivers have gone on strike.
New York City subway trafﬁc is just a third of what it was before the pandemic.

A year into the coronavirus pandemic, public transit is hanging by a thread in many cities around the world.
Riders remain at home or they remain fearful of boarding buses and trains. And without their fares, public
transit revenues have fallen off a cliff. In some places, service has been cut. In others, fares have gone up and
transit workers are facing the prospect of layoffs.

That’s a disaster for the world’s ability to address that other global crisis: climate change. Public transit offers
a relatively simple way for cities to lower their greenhouse gas emissions, not to mention a way to improve air
quality, noise and congestion.

“We are facing maybe the most important crisis in the public transit sector in different parts of the world,”
said Sérgio Avelleda, the director of urban mobility for the World Resources Institute and a former transport
secretary for São Paulo, Brazil. “It’s urgent to act.”

But act how? Transit agencies that have been bailed out by the government are wondering how long the
generosity will last, and almost everywhere, transportation experts are scrambling to ﬁgure out how to better
adapt public transit to the needs of riders as cities begin to emerge from the pandemic.

For now, people simply aren’t moving around much. Even in cities like Delhi, where most businesses are
open, many ofﬁce workers are working from home and universities haven’t resumed in-person classes. Paris
has a 6 p.m. curfew.

In some places, fear of the virus has driven people into cars. In the United States, used car sales have shot up
and so have prices of used cars. In India, a company that sells secondhand cars online saw sales swell in 2020
and its own value as a company jump to $1 billion, according to news reports. Elsewhere, bike sales have
grown, suggesting that people are pedaling a bit more.

The worry about the future is twofold. If commuters shun public transit for cars as their cities recover from
the pandemic, that has huge implications for air pollution and greenhouse gas emissions. Most importantly,
if transit systems continue to lose passenger fare revenues, they will not be able to make the investments
necessary to be efﬁcient, safe and attractive to commuters.

There are a few outliers. In Shanghai, for example, public transit numbers took a nosedive in February 2020,
but riders have returned as new coronavirus infections remain low and the economy rebounds.

But the picture is grim in many more cities.

On the Paris Métro, ridership was just over half of normal in the ﬁrst two months of this year. Île-de-France
Mobilités, the transport agency for the greater Paris area, said it lost 2.6 billion euros, or over $3 billion, last
year. The agency is projecting a shortfall of an additional billion euros this year.

In Amsterdam, ridership numbers on the city’s trams and buses are around a third of normal, and the transit
agency’s   website   counsels   people   to   “only   travel   when   absolutely   necessary.”   In   Rome,   Metro   ridership
remains below half of prepandemic levels.



One of the busiest metro systems in the world, the London Underground, which normally clocks around four
million journeys every weekday, is currently operating at around 20 percent of its normal capacity. Buses are

 



a   bit   more   populated,   running   around   40   percent   of   normal.   The   city   transit   agency,   which   had   once
projected a budget surplus for 2020, has instead been relying on government bailouts since the pandemic
hit. It expects it will take at least two years to see public transit usage return to prepandemic levels.


“It’s been pretty devastating, to be perfectly honest,” said Alex Williams, director of city planning for Transport
for London. “One of our concerns are substantial declines in public transport and higher levels of car use.”

London is one of a handful of cities around the world with a congestion tax designed to reduce car trafﬁc in
the city center. Both London and Paris sought to use lockdowns to expand bike lanes.

In the Indian capital, New Delhi, the subway reopened last September after a suspension of many months.
Ridership in February 2021 hovered under 2.6 million, compared with more than 5.7 million for the same
month the year before, and bus trafﬁc stood at just over half of prepandemic levels.

Lucky are those agencies, as in India and across Europe, that are subsidized by their governments. There’s
even more distress in cities where people rely in large part on private bus companies.

In Lagos, Nigeria, fares have doubled on private bus lines for rides longer than a kilometer, or a bit more than
half a mile.

In Rio de Janeiro, a once-celebrated bus network is in a shambles. The private company that runs the system
has cut over a third of its ﬂeet and laid off 800 employees as the number of passengers has shrunk by half
since last March, according to the city transportation department. Strikes by bus drivers have made bus
travel even slower and more chaotic.

“I have never seen anything like it,” said José Carlos Sacramento, 68, a leader of a bus workers union in Rio,
who has been working in public transportation for ﬁve decades. “I think it might never go back to normal.”

City   ofﬁcials   said   they   hope   to   use   the   crisis   as   an   opportunity   to   revamp   the   system,   including   by
persuading   the   private   bus   companies   to   be   more   transparent   about   their   operations   in   exchange   for
possible ﬁnancial help from the government.

After all, said Maína Celidonio, the head of the city transportation department, a clean, efﬁcient bus system is
critical for Rio to not only reduce its carbon emissions but also to clean its air. “It’s not just an environmental
issue, but a public health issue,” Ms. Celidonio said.

The bigger challenge for all cities is to ﬁx their public transit systems now so that passengers will return, said
Mohamed Mezghani, head of the International Association of Public Transport. They could adjust peak hour
service as telecommuting from home becomes more commonplace, expand bus only lanes that make
commutes more efﬁcient and comfortable or improve ventilation systems to assure citizens that riding
public transit is safe.

“Those cities that were investing, they will get out stronger,” Mr. Mezghani said. “People will feel more
comfortable traveling in a new modern public transit system. It’s about perception in the end.”

Shola Lawal and Hari Kumar contributed reporting.


