 News, Friday, October 16, 2020 553 mots, p. 12

Climate change 'wiped out earliest humans'

Paper argues our ancient cousins failed to adapt to new conditions, sending a message to modern man
By Olivia Rudgard environment correspondent

CLIMATE change wiped out early humans, a study has found, as scientists warn that global warming could have a greater impact than previously thought.

Cousins of homo sapiens failed to adapt to the cold tens of thousands of years ago, a new paper argues, leaving them vulnerable to extinction when temperatures dropped below the levels they were used to.

The reasons behind the disappearance of several species leaving only homo sapiens to survive has been a point of debate among scientists, who hypothesised that Earth's changing climate played a role, alongside competition between species.

But a new study published in the journal One Earth claims that a failure to adapt to a shifting climate was the main cause in the loss of three species, because they were unable to cope with colder conditions.

Shortly before they disappeared, homo erectus, homo heidelbergensis and homo neanderthalensis, more commonly known as neanderthals, all experienced sudden changes in their environment.

The team used climate modelling technology to emulate the shifts in climate going back five million years and compared them to fossil records, finding that for all three, conditions existed that would have been particularly hard for them to survive during their last known period of existence.

Climate change was the "most likely candidate" for the loss of the first two, and it combined with competition from homo sapiens to wipe out the neanderthals, the paper concludes.

Homo erectus, believed to have been adapted to warm and humid climates in

South East Asia, became extinct around the start of the last glacial period, which spanned the period from 115,000 to 11,700 years ago. This would have been the coldest period the species had ever experienced, the paper says.

Neanderthals, which died out later during the same period, disappeared from northerly latitudes first, adding evidence to the theory that they struggled to adapt to colder climates.

Earlier, homo heidelbergensis, often thought to be an ancestor both of modern humans and of neanderthals, experienced similar struggles. Pasquale Raia, the lead author, of Università di Napoli Federico II in Napoli, Italy, said that neanderthals died out even despite their use of clothing, fire and tools.

"They tried hard; they made for the warmest places in reach as the climate got cold, but at the end of the day, that wasn't enough," he said. He said he believed the most likely direct cause was a failure to change the plants and animals they relied on for food. While advances in technology make us more resilient now, the paper concludes that "the threat posed by the current, anthropogenic climate change for global wildlife and, by extension, ourselves, is possibly even more powerful than is generally appreciated".

Scant fossil records make the earlier findings less reliable, Prof Chris Stringer of the Natural History Museum, who wasn't involved in the research, told The Scientist magazine, but climate change "probably was a significant factor in some of those extinctions". Prof Raia said the findings were "worrisome" for modern humans, especially given our reliance on other species for survival.
