

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Monday, February 1, 2021 457 mots, p. 8

PM's father defends rewilding as he takes on climate
change role

By Helena Horton

FARMING must return to traditional methods to help the environment, the Boris Johnson's father has said, as
he takes on a new climate change role.

Stanley Johnson, the new international ambassador for the Conservative Environment Network (CEN), has
long been a campaigner on green issues, and is a passionate advocate of "rewilding", recently visiting some
reintroduced bears in Italy. The author is expected to lobby for wilder farming at the major climate change
conference COP26 in Glasgow in November.

Mr Johnson told The Daily Telegraph about his vision: "It's not rewilding as such but going back to methods
of farming which are very much the way things were. Rain-fed agriculture, grass-fed agriculture, even not
ploughing up. You may gain more in carbon terms from doing that than from planting a load of trees. There
is an absolute need for a change in the farming system in Britain and as we come out of the EU that's an
amazing way to do that. I have just agreed to be the international ambassador for CEN.

"We are going to be focusing on the Climate Change Conference. It's an honorary assignment of course. I'm
not going to ask to be paid at my age!"

His son, the prime minister, currently has no plans to ban intensive farming and force farmers to go back to
ancient methods, though the Government is bringing in a payments scheme for farms which use their land
to improve the environment.

One matter father and son seem to ﬁnd consensus on is that of beavers. Boris is understood to have put in
place their procurement for his father's land for his birthday.

Stanley said he had tried to make his land suitable for the rewilded rodents, but it had been a struggle, and
he wanted to be allowed to release them on the river through his Exmoor estate. This is illegal under current
laws, which are designed to prevent them running amok.

He is pushing for his son to get the Government to publish its national beaver strategy to enable them to be
let loose in England's waterways.

"Beavers have been put on hold at the moment because of coronavirus," he said, "but I need to think about
how I am going to do it. You have the pen, a biggish pen covering a couple of acres and some running water,
you could just make a pond.

"I need to be very careful because the pond could dry up or the whole place could ﬂood and they could be
washed away down the river.

"Of course I have the river, but they can't be released there until we have a national beaver policy."


