

The Daily Telegraph (London, UK)
News, Tuesday, March 16, 2021 514 mots, p. 10

Climate crisis is 'like threat of nuclear war'
Environment Agency chief urges people to adapt their lives ready to survive the irrevocable
changes ahead

By Olivia Rudgard environment correspondent

THE head of the Environment Agency will compare climate change to the Cold War, arguing that the world
needs to adapt to survive the "existential threat" of global warming.

Sir James Bevan will talk about his experiences as a child living under the threat of nuclear war in a speech to
be given today at a discussion hosted by the Whitehall and Industry Group.

Net zero goals will not be enough to halt the effects of climate change and adaptations will be necessary to
help humanity cope, he is expected to tell business leaders at the private event.

"When I was growing up in the Seventies and the Cold War was a reality, the government ran a public
information campaign to tell us all how to cope with nuclear attack, called Protect and

Survive. Those days are thankfully behind us, and it was always a moot point whether that was the best
response to the existential threat of nuclear attack. But if we want to respond to the existential threat we face
today - the climate emergency - then we could adopt a variation on that slogan: Adapt and Thrive."

Protect and Survive was developed by the government to inform the British public about what to do in the
event of a nuclear strike.

As well as a booklet which could be bought for 50p, 20 short cartoons were also created, advising people on
how to choose a fallout room, stockpile and ration supplies and care for casualties.

Originally classiﬁed, they were leaked and broadcast on BBC's Panorama in March 1980.

An unavoidable threat is now posed by climate change, as the Earth has already warmed one degree above
preindustrial temperatures, causing extreme ﬂooding, coastal erosion, serious droughts, water shortages and
wildﬁres,

Sir James will say.

The UK's target to reach net zero by 2050, he said, was "not enough to save our planet". We needed to "adapt
how we live so that we are resilient to the irrevocable changes carbon has already wrought in our climate
and those still to come".

Under the terms of the Paris Agreement, countries including the UK, have pledged to introduce measures to
limit warming to less than 2C and keep it as close as possible to 1.5C - goals that some scientists have said are
not attainable unless decarbonisation plans become more ambitious.

Sir James will say the crisis offers the "opportunity to create a better world"

including "cleaner, greener cities which are more beautiful and better to live in than the ones we have now".

His call echoes the Government's "build back better" plan for economic recovery after the coronavirus, which
promises green jobs and investment in infrastructure.

Sir James has previously warned that some of Britain's coastal communities may have to be relocated due to
rising sea levels. Last summer he said that the UK was no longer a "wet and rainy country" and urged more
caution with water consumption.




