 COMMENT & ANALYSIS, Saturday, December 12, 2009 747 mots, p. 9

Climate change, the great leveller
By Christopher Caldwell

The Copenhagen summit on climate change is starting to resemble the August 1928 meeting in Paris at which more than a dozen nations, including Britain, France, Germany, Japan and the US, signed a treaty to abolish war. A real problem, a commitment to solving it and a large dose of arrogance convinced the world - 65 countries, eventually - to sign the Kellogg-Briand pact, named after the American and French ministers who devised it. But the reality of perpetual peace proved harder to advance than the ideal of it.

The leak of a 13-page Danish government document that looked like a draft for a final agreement dominated the first week of meetings in Copenhagen, particularly after Lumumba Stanislaus Di-Aping, the Sudanese negotiator for the Group of 77 developing countries, wept at a meeting of African politicians. He complained that the leaked draft was a "suicide pact". It does have its drawbacks. It is confusing to non-specialists, alluding to "robust MRV" (measurement, reporting and verification), the "Bali building blocks" (UN climate guidelines negotiated in 2007) and ICAO (the International Civil Aviation Organisation, which would devise carbon fees). The paper shows signs of having been negotiated with feminist non-government organisations. It bizarrely invokes "gender equality" in a climate context. But none of that is sufficient to explain Mr Di-Aping's outburst, or the sense that it imperilled an agreement. It was only a draft, after all. Anyone who did not like it could write his own. An official draft is now out.

What made the argument over the leak so contentious was that it was about money. Mr Di-Aping's complaint was the miserliness, as he saw it, of the climate aid that the draft envisioned developed countries sending to poor ones: $10bn (€6.8bn, £6.1bn) a year over the next three years was, as Mr Di-Aping put it, "not enough to buy us coffins". He compared it with the trillion he estimated the west had paid to bail out its banks. More important, it was far below the $67bn per year that African leaders, meeting last summer, decided would be a reasonable amount for the west to pay them in environment compensation. In short, many of the developing world's representatives have come to Copenhagen seeking reparations.

Just as the e-mails stolen from the University of East Anglia last month cast doubt on the scientific good faith of Copenhagen's proponents, the row over the Danish draft casts doubt on their political good faith. Western publics have come to understand that combating climate change will cost money. But why does that imply a global redistribution of wealth?

There are two ways to answer that. One is in terms of need. Africa is warmer and drier than most continents, and more dependent on agriculture. It may be that fluctuations in the global climate will hit Africa harder. These are technical points. They are not Mr Di-Aping's subject.

The other angle is to think in terms of western culpability. This is mostly a political matter. The call for reparations has parallels with American legal activism. Particularly since the rise of the critical legal studies movement in the 1980s, there have been calls for "environmental reparations" and "environmental justice" in the US, too. But in those cases the environment is a secondary consideration. Setting benchmarks for social reform is what comes first. Polluted and contaminated neighbourhoods cry out for reparations not on grounds of public health but on grounds of remedying racism and inequality.

Morally based reparations are relatively new to international relations. They tend to be paid after wars, from losers to winners, most onerously - and notoriously - from Germany to its former foes after the first world war. The winner looks at the payments as morally justified, of course, but the loser will have a hard time distinguishing between reparations and plunder. No climate change agreement built on settling the west's supposed "debt" to the rest of the world will have democratic legitimacy in the US.

There is a basic problem that besets all schemes of group reparation - those who inflicted and suffered the harm are often dead. Blameless people pay. Unharmed people collect. They become rentiers of injustice. The problem is extreme when it comes to climate change in a global economy. China, the world's largest emitter of carbon dioxide and one of its fastest growing, is a member of the same developing-nations group represented by Mr Di-Aping. In the context of emitting greenhouse gases, China is not "developing" - it is at the top of the league table. It is more perpetrator than victim. The developed countries, meanwhile, have mostly passed their peak of carbon-dioxide emissions, and are putting out less every year.

But the entire concept of victims and perpetrators breaks down when it comes to global warming. Economies collude in pollution. It is less accurate to say that China has a large carbon footprint than to say that China is the place where the world's carbon footprint is located. The gases its factories emit are required to manufacture the stuff that western consumers think they need. China's pollution makes the US and Europe cleaner than they would be if they did that manufacturing themselves. Similarly, US pollution, the result more of consumption than production, enriches the exporting countries of Europe and Asia. It may provide the margin required to make the greening of those economies acceptable in the first place. Global warming is not a bilateral problem. It is a global problem. The Danish leak made clear that tackling it will mean big losses not just of western wealth but of western sovereignty. 