 COMPANIES - UK & IRELAND, Thursday, October 22, 2009 275 mots, p. 20

Insurers call for action on climate change
By Paul J Davies, Insurance Correspondent

The insurance industry will today add its voice to calls for more action to halt climate change. The industry says big cuts in emissions by developed countries and funding for developing countries to tackle climate change are needed to avoid a "systemic risk to the global economy".

Andrew Torrance, chairman of ClimateWise, an industry lobby group, and chief executive of Allianz Insurance in the UK, will tell a United Nations summit in South Africa that inaction could leave people unable to get insurance.

"Climate change must be tackled now if insurers are to continue to play their fullest role in managing climate risk," he will say. "If governments fail to act today, substantial markets may become uninsurable tomorrow."

The industry fears that climate change will leave it facing bigger losses from more extreme weather events. "The risks that we face tomorrow mean that we will have to hold more capital because bad loss years will be much worse," Mr Torrance told the FT.

ClimateWise, which is looking to increase pressure on governments attending December's climate change conference in Copenhagen, wants the developed world to agree a 40 per cent cut in emissions by 2020 and to strike a deal on the size and structure of the financing package to help the developing world tackle climate change.

"A new international deal is ultimately in all of our interests and the costs of transition to a low climate risk economy are manageable," Mr Torrance will say. "Delay is not an option."

Insurance losses related to weather could rise by 75 per cent over the next 30 years, according to Mr Torrance. The industry has already seen a 15-fold rise in weather-related claims over the past 30 years due to increases in the frequency and intensity of storms.

However, academic and industry studies have found that all the increase in losses seen by insurers is due to socio-economic factors such as increasing wealth and greater concentrations of people in coastal areas such as Florida.

There is also significant debate in scientific circles about the influence of global warming on weather patterns.
