 Foreign, Tuesday, October 20, 2009 380 mots, p. A 4

Officials Hint At Progress Negotiating Climate Deal
By ANDREW C. REVKIN

A two-day meeting of officials from countries responsible for the bulk of the world's greenhouse gas emissions ended Monday in London with hints that rich and developing nations might be able to bridge at least some of their differences on issues hobbling agreement on a new climate treaty.

The session was the sixth in a string of informal meetings of "major economies" -- 16 countries plus the European Union -- initiated by the Obama administration last spring.

The meetings, building on an earlier series of sessions started by the Bush administration, focused on the world's biggest emitters of heat-trapping gases to build momentum toward a new climate treaty when formal negotiations take place in December in Copenhagen.

At a news conference after the meeting, officials from the United States and Britain rejected the idea that a deadline set by the world's countries to negotiate a new climate agreement by December would slip.

Todd Stern, the State Department's special envoy on climate change, said all major countries were committed to seeking "a strong, pragmatic and solid agreement" in Copenhagen.

Echoing Ed Miliband, the British secretary of state for energy and climate and the chairman of the London session, Mr. Stern added: "We're not really thinking about a Plan B in that sense."

Mr. Stern also rejected criticisms by environmental groups and some recent statements from officials in developing countries that the United States was not doing enough to cut emissions at home. While accepting that the United States has the most responsibility for the buildup of greenhouse gases in the atmosphere so far, he emphasized that by 2030, two-thirds of emissions could easily be coming from developing countries.

Citing actions by President Obama and in Congress, where climate change and energy legislation is creeping forward, Mr. Stern added that from now on, "The effort by the United States will be absolutely comparable to what the E.U. is doing."

Mr. Miliband said there was growing accord among nations at the meeting on the level of aid required to help poor countries withstand threats resulting from climate change and adopt less-polluting energy technology. He also reported some progress on findings ways to incorporate what would surely be varied commitments by individual countries into an overarching pact.

"I think we've made progress on the architecture," he said. In a communique posted online, the participating governments said they would publish a list of actions and partnerships on clean energy technology on Nov. 15.

In a speech preceding the final round of talks on Monday, Prime Minister Gordon Brown of Britain admonished attendees to aim for concrete commitments on cutting emissions and on aid for poor countries most exposed to the risks of warming.

But he also said that all factions in the complicated effort would need to be flexible. "We cannot compromise with the catastrophe of unchecked climate change, so we must compromise with one another," he said.
