 News, Wednesday, October 14, 2020 517 mots, p. 14

LGIM plans to reprove businesses for lack of climate change action

Financials
ATTRACTA MOONEY

Legal and General Investment Management is set to warn 500 companies to do more to tackle climate change or risk being named and shamed, in an escalation of a long-running environmental campaign by the UK's largest asset manager.

The $1.5tn fund house has created publicly available climate ratings for over 1,000 companies, a more than 10-fold increase in the number of targets since LGIM started pushing its global warming engagement campaign in 2016.

When companies fall short of meeting its minimum standards, including lacking comprehensive disclosure of emissions or key sustainability certifications, LGIM said it would use its vote at annual meetings or potentially sell out of the stocks in some funds.

It is also calling for companies to set "net zero" targets to reduce carbon emissions.

'We want to help steer companies and our clients towards success in a low-carbon world'," said Michelle Scrimgeour, LGIM chief executive.

Having ranked the 1,000 companies, LGIM is writing to the half that it has concluded are lagging on the question of addressing climate change.

A combination of its size and being an early advocate on the climate change issue, means LGIM wields significant influence with both publicly traded companies as well as rival asset managers who closely watching its strategy. Since LGIM first made its so-called climate pledge, a growing number of fund managers, including BlackRock, have also spoken out about the risks of climate change, partly because of concern that government efforts to tackle global warming could threaten those businesses that do not adapt.

At the same time, asset managers are keen to benefit from the wave of demand for environmental, social and governance investing, which sets moral as well as financial goals.

Despite the pandemic, assets in sustainable mutual funds across the world reached a record high of $1tn in the second quarter, up 25 per cent on the first three months of 2020, according to Morningstar, the data provider. In contrast, assets across all mutual funds globally increased 13 per cent to $35tn. Meryam Omi, head of sustainability and responsible investment strategy at LGIM, said the fund house had chosen 60 companies to focus on in particular over the next year.

"We are picking companies based on how influential they are and the ones that really need the nudge from behind," she said.

She added that LGIM was not just focused on the losers of climate change, but also companies that could benefit from the efforts to tackle global warming.

"We have seen a lot of inquiries from our clients on ESG," she said. "It is not just about risks, but about opportunities. It is a trend that is only going to grow. People want to be exposed to the winners."

Unlike those rivals who specialise in picking stocks, LGIM largely invests passively, meaning it does not have the option of easily selling out of stocks that it deems are failing to take climate change seriously. 