Climate talks will test Biden’s pledge to make global
heating a priority



Edward Helmore

27 mars 2021

Joe Biden is doubling down on his reset of his predecessor’s environmental policies by
inviting the Russian president, Vladimir Putin, and Xi Jinping of China to the first big
climate talks of his administration next month aimed at increasing cooperation to fight
global heating.

The Leaders Summit on Climate talks, scheduled to be held virtually on 22 and 23 April,
are an opportunity for the US to shape, hasten and deepen global efforts to cut climate-
wrecking fossil fuel pollution, administration officials told the Associated Press.

According to the White House, 40 invitations went out on Friday to leaders that
encompass a range of nations, some already affected badly by climate crisis, others on a
spectrum from relatively reformist to ultra-polluters.

“In his invitation, the president urged leaders to use the summit as an opportunity to
outline how their countries also will contribute to stronger climate ambition,” the White
House said.

Dizzying pace of Biden's climate action sounds death knell for era of denialism

Biden’s effort is an arena in which the US can display clear differentiation with the
previous Donald Trump administration, which had rejected the 2015 UN Paris climate
accords in favor of an America First energy policy that, among other contentious
initiatives, rejected improving energy-efficiency standards and promoted domestic
fracking to reduce foreign-energy dependence.

The talks are also designed to revive a US-convened forum of the world’s major
economies on climate that previous administrations, Republican and Democrat, had
allowed to lapse. They will also mark the first time a US leader has attended a major
international climate discussions in more than four years.

The summit is also a fulfillment of a campaign pledge and executive order by Biden
designed to launch in tandem with an anticipated multi-trillion dollar infrastructure
spending package designed both to stimulate the post-Covid US economy and sharply cut
emissions of greenhouse gasses from legacy fuel sources.

As a candidate in the 2020 election, Biden pledged $2tn in investment to help transform
the US into a zero-emission economy by 2050 while building clean-energy and technology
jobs.



Officials said they hope that by demonstrating US commitment to emissions cuts at home,
the US could encourage similar moves abroad, including encouraging governments to
reform transportation and power-generating sectors as well as broader consumer
economies to meet more ambitious environmental targets

But the talks will test Biden’s pledge to make climate crisis a priority among competing
political, economic, policy, pandemic and post-pandemic issues, according to AP.

Led by US climate envoy John Kerry, US officials have reportedly been emphasizing US
climate intentions during early one-on-one talks with foreign leaders. Biden reportedly
discussed the talks with British prime minister Boris Johnson on Friday, with both
leaders agreeing on the need to keep emissions-cutting targets ambitious.

A summary of the conversation provided by the White House said the pair discussed “the
importance of developing ambitious climate goals, noting the opportunities provided by
the Leaders Summit on Climate and the UK’s G7 presidency”.

But officials also told the AP the US is still deliberating on how far the administration will
go in setting more ambitious US emissions targets. The talks, they said, will be
livestreamed to encourage other international leaders to use it as a platform to showcase
their own countries’ climate-crisis commitments.

However, despite the emphasis on global cooperation, early administration efforts to
reshape US relations with China got off to a problematic start last week during high-level
talks in Anchorage, Alaska that began with an exchange of insults.

Against that backdrop, the climate talks – coming seven months ahead of November’s UN
global climate sessions in Glasgow – will offer a deliberate test of whether, after four years
of isolationist and aggressive diplomatic non-compliance, the US still has power to shape
global decision-making.

Biden’s invitation list includes leaders of the world’s biggest economies and European
blocs. But it is not yet clear how Russia and China, both on the list of invitees, will
respond or if they are willing to cooperate with any US-led climate initiative.

While China lags the US in overall economic might, it is the world’s top emitter of climate-
damaging pollution, with the US second, India third and Russia at four.

“China is by far the world’s largest emitter. Russia needs to do more to reduce its
emissions,” said Nigel Purvis, who worked on climate diplomacy in past Democratic and
Republican administrations. “Not including these countries because they aren’t doing
enough would be like launching an anti-smoking campaign but not directing it at
smokers.”

Brazil’s rightwing president, Jair Bolsonaro, is also likely to be in the diplomatic
crosshairs for thwarting preservation efforts of the Amazon rainforest, a vital global
carbon sink.



Among those invited are leaders of countries under the most immediate – and devastating
– ecological threat. They include Bangladesh and the Marshall islands, both threatened by
rising sea levels.

The invitation list is notable for other reasons, too: King Salman bin Abdulaziz Al Saud,
Kingdom of Saudi Arabia, is invited. But heir apparent Crown Prince Mohammed bin
Salman, subject to a diplomatic freeze out over what US intelligence agencies conclude
was his approval of an operation to “capture or kill” US-based journalist Jamal
Khashoggi, is left out.

 

 




