

The New York Times (web site)
Monday, March 22, 2021 -  1041 mots

Australia’s Worst Floods in Decades Quicken Concerns
About Climate Change

By Damien Cave

In a country that suffered the harshest wildﬁres in its recorded history just a year ago, the deluge has
become another awful milestone.

WINDSOR, Australia — Kelly Miller stood in her doorway on Monday, watching the water rise to within a few
inches of the century-old home where she runs an alternative medicine business. The bridge nearby had
already gone under in some of Australia’s worst ﬂooding in decades, along with an abandoned car in the
parking lot.

“It’s coming up really quickly,” she said.

Two massive storms have converged over eastern Australia, dumping more than three feet of rain in just ﬁve
days. In a country that suffered the worst wildﬁres in its recorded history just a year ago, the deluge has
become another record-breaker — a once-in-50-years event, or possibly 100, depending on the rain that’s
expected to continue through Tuesday night.

Nearly 20,000 Australians have been forced to evacuate, and more than 150 schools have been closed. The
storms have swept away the home of a couple on their wedding day, prompted at least 500 rescues and
drowned roads from Sydney up into the state of Queensland 500 miles north.

Shane Fitzsimmons, the resilience commissioner for New South Wales — a new state position formed after
last year’s ﬁres — described the event as another compounding disaster. Last year, huge ﬁres combined into
history-making   infernos   that   scorched   an   area   larger   than   many   European   countries.   This   year,
thunderstorms have fused and hovered, delivering enough water to push rivers like the Hawkesbury to their
highest levels since the 1960s.

Scientists note that both forms of catastrophe represent Australia’s new normal. The country is one of many
seeing a pattern of intensiﬁcation — more extreme hot days and heat waves, as well as more extreme
rainfalls over short periods.

It’s all tied to a warming earth, caused by greenhouse gases. Because global temperatures have risen 1.1
degrees Celsius, or about 2 degrees Fahrenheit, over preindustrial levels, landscapes dry out more quickly,
producing severe droughts, even as more water vapor rises into the atmosphere, increasing the likelihood of
extreme downpours.

“There is a very strong link between global warming and that intensiﬁcation in rainfall,” said Andy Pitman,
director of the ARC Center of Excellence for Climate Extremes at the University of New South Wales. “There’s
good scientiﬁc evidence to say extreme rain is becoming more extreme due to global warming.”

Australia’s conservative government — heavily resistant to aggressive action on climate change that might
threaten the country’s fossil fuel industry — has yet to make that link.

Prime Minister Scott Morrison has offered funds for those forced to ﬂee, and several dozen areas have already
been declared disaster zones.

“It’s another testing time for our country,” he told a Sydney radio station, 2GB, on Monday.

Windsor may become one of the places hardest hit. Over the weekend, the Hawkesbury rose rapidly by more
than 30 feet, and it is expected to peak in the next day or so at 42 feet.

With rain continuing to fall, emergency workers wearing bright orange went door to door on side streets
with waist-deep puddles where the road dipped.



In and around the historic downtown, many of the businesses close to the river stayed shut on Monday, with

 



a few putting sandbags by their doors. The central meeting place seemed to be at the foot of the Windsor
Bridge, where television crews and crowds in rubber boots marveled at the view.


The new Windsor Bridge, which opened just a few months ago as a “ﬂood-proof” replacement for an older
bridge, was completely underwater.

It was built 10 feet higher than the bridge it replaced, but the river ﬂowed over it as if it did not exist. A red
ﬂashing light on the top of a buried yellow excavator offered the only hint of the old bridge, or what had once
been solid ground.

Cameron Gooch, 46, a diesel mechanic from a town nearby, said he saw huge trees speeding downriver
toward the coast a day earlier. The water seemed to have slowed down, he said, becoming a giant bathtub
with water held in place and rising slowly from tributaries.

“That’s the problem,” he said. “It’s just going to keep building up.”

A few feet away, Rebecca Turnbull, the curator of Howe House, a home and museum built in 1820, put
handwritten notes on the furniture that would need to be removed if the water surged a few more feet.

She pointed to a line drawn on the doorway of a room that smelled of damp old wood.

“This is where the water came up to in 1867,” she said.

Like many others in Windsor, she said she doubted the river would reach quite that high this time around.
But that didn’t bring much solace to those closer to the rising brown sludge.

Rachael Goldsworthy, who owns a home and real estate business just behind Ms. Miller’s naturopathic clinic
— it’s a few feet higher on the hillside — said she saw a new Mercedes washed downstream the night before
after a man had parked in a small puddle and then went into a grocery store to buy a roast chicken. In just
minutes, the rising water carried the car away.

On Monday, she tried to help Ms. Miller ﬁnd a few milk crates — the only defense for some of the heavy
furniture that could not be moved out.

Inside, Ms. Miller and her son collected oils and other products that she would normally be selling, with plans
to put them in a truck or a storage unit. The antique ﬂowered carpet was still dry, and she’d taped up the
toilets to keep the septic system from backing up into the house.

She said she didn’t have ﬂood insurance because she couldn’t afford it. So all she could do was learn from
YouTube videos about how to ﬁght a ﬂood.

“We’re trying to work out how to save what we can,” she said. “We don’t want to lose everything.”

Yan Zhuang contributed reporting from Melbourne, Australia.



 


