  Wednesday, February 19, 2020  Financial Times • p. 7 • 2422 words 
 Covering the climate change bill Flood funding 'Only thing worse than no insurance is bad insurance' 

 Floods were once considered too irregular to insure against profitably. Global warming and technology have triggered a change of mind. But who should pay for it — governments, industry or households? By Robert Armstrong and Oliver Ralph  Robert Armstrong and Oliver Ralph  Pam Webb worked a usual day at Truffle Lodge, her spa business in the Yorkshire village of Fishlake, near the River Don. Floods were expected nearby, but an email from the UK's Environment Agency told her that Fishlake was safe.  The agency was wrong. At 9.30pm the water started pouring into the business and Ms Webb's home next door. "It came in the front and back, it came up through the flooring in every single ground floor room," she says. "It's heart- breaking seeing your home and business going in such a small amount of time."  The flood caused tens of thousands of pounds in damage and forced the spa to close for nine weeks. Adding to the trau- ma, says Ms Webb, flooding had been excluded from her insurance policies about a year earlier, so she has had to pick up the entire cost.  It is a scenario that has played out again across parts of the UK over the past 10 days, with two severe storms hitting the country and adding to the cost associat-  © 2020 The Financial Times Ltd. All rights reserved. Please do not cut and paste FT articles and redistrib- ute by email or post to the web. Le présent doc- ument est protégé par les lois et conventions interna- tionales sur le droit d'auteur et son utilisation est régie par ces lois et conventions.   A rescue worker wades through floodwaters in Tenbury Wells, western England, on Sunday. Storm Dennis caused flooding and power outages across large swaths of Britain and northern Europe Oli Scarff/AFP/ Getty  ed with climate change. Economic dam- age worldwide from flooding last year was $82bn, the greatest of any natural peril, according to Aon. Just $13bn of that was insured.  Global warming means that flooding is likely to become more frequent, say nat- ural catastrophe modelling specialists. Warmer air holds more moisture, lead- ing to wetter and more frequent severe storms. Last year, Nasa used tempera- ture data gathered from space, to reveal that every additional 1C of ocean sur- face temperature increases the probabil- ity of severe storms by 20 per cent. Meanwhile, rising sea levels mean more coastal flooding, with some estimates suggesting that 230m people are at risk from storm surges, a risk amplified by steady migration towards conurbations near coasts and rivers.  Those numbers, combined with the lack   of cover, should be an attractive target for a global insurance industry that has abundant capital after low interest rates drew fresh investors seeking better re- turns into the sector. The risk consultan- cy Milliman estimates that the US mar- ket alone could generate $48bn of annu- al premium revenue for insurers.  Floods were once considered too irregu- lar to underwrite profitably, but sophis- ticated catastrophe models — which can more accurately predict where floods might occur — have changed that.  "Reinsurance companies want the risk," says Nancy Watkins, principal and ac- tuary at Milliman. "They have been the leaders, and have been running around trying to sell [flood reinsurance] for four or five years."  Of the $125bn caused Harvey " Yet, managing the increased flooding is go- ing to be very expensive. Insurance sys- tems and government programmes have developed haphazardly, and are ill-suit- ed to deal with the growing risks. This is prompting rethink over which risks should be held publicly, and which pri- vately.  "The world has got enough People globe at storm 3% of the insurance capital to protect against flood risk," says Stephen Hester, chief executive of insurer RSA. "It's a question of whether society wants people who live on flood plains to pay the right price for the risk, or whether there should be some sort of subsidy."  Access to cover In the US the National Flood Insurance Program, the federal scheme that provides the overwhelming majority of US residential coverage, has about 5m policies providing $1.3tn of cover. The numbers look large, but only 15 per cent of US households have any  flood coverage at all. During 2017's Hurricane Harvey that hit Texas and Louisiana, 70 per cent of the estimated $125bn in damage was uninsured.  Flood insurance is mandatory for any- one in the US with a governmentbacked mortgage — that is, most US homeown- ers — if the home falls into a designated "special flood hazard area", defined as being at risk of inundation at least once every 100 years.  But the NFIP, established in 1968, was never designed or capitalised to operate like a private insurer. The idea "was to price the product so more people would have it and it would [then] reduce the disaster costs to the government", says David Maurstad, chief executive of the NFIP. By design, "the government would make up the difference" in above- average years for flooding.  This arrangement worked until about 20 years ago. Between 1978 and 2003, the NFIP paid out claims of under $500m a year. Since then, the claims have aver- aged $3.5bn a year. Premiums and fees have been inadequate to cover the pay- outs. In 2017, the federal government forgave $16bn in NFIP debt. Even so, the scheme owes $20bn to the US Trea- sury.  around the from about population That mandatory coverage areas are too small is only part of the problem, say critics. They also give the impression that flood risk stops at a line on a map. In fact, "flood risk varies continuously both within that 100-year floodplain and be- yond", says Carolyn Kousky, executive director of the Wharton Risk Center. Flood risk is not included in US home insurance policies, creating the impres- sion, say flood experts, that the risk is  incidental or secondary.  These are not the only distortions.  NFIP charges premiums that do not vary with the replacement cost of houses, so expensive houses pay belowmarket rates. It means taxpayers are effectively providing subsidies for luxury beach houses. "The more expensive your house, the better deal you are getting from the NFIP," Ms Watkins says. The NFIP is not permitted to withdraw cov- erage once it is granted, so pays repeat- edly to repair and rebuild thousands of homes in high-risk areas. According to Pew Charitable Trust, such "severe repetitive loss" properties cost the NFIP more than $12.5bn up to 2016.  Private insurers hesitate to compete against a subsidised product. A warren of state regulations makes matters worse. In Louisiana, for example, rais- ing premiums because of an "act of God" — defined as a storm or other nat- ural cause — is forbidden. Several US states ban or limit the use of catastrophe models in setting premiums.  Various attempts to reform the NFIP and bring premiums into line with the risks have met resistance from coastal resi- dents, their representatives in Congress and the real estate industry. The latest effort, "Risk Rating 2.0", would have linked prices and risk more closely. Originally scheduled to take effect this year, it was recently pushed into 2021.  Industry-led initiative The UK has tried a different model.  Flood Re, the UK scheme, forces all home insurance buyers to chip in to sub- sidise the cost of cover in flood-prone areas. Homeowners pay about £10 a year over their existing premium and, in   theory, insurance for people in risky ar- eas becomes more affordable.  it can't happen to you. If you have, you think it won't happen again."  Flood Re was set up by the government in 2016. If it runs out of money, the industry has to top it up, but that has not happened yet. "The political desire at the time [it was set up] was for it to be an industry-owned solution," says Andy Bord, Flood Re's chief executive. To discourage new development in flood prone areas, Flood Re does not ap- ply to homes built after 2009.  Flood Re is only supposed to last for 25 years. The intention was that it should act as a catalyst for better flood planning by the government, local authorities and homeowners, so that by 2039 insurance would be more affordable for people in vulnerable areas, even without the sub- sidy.  There is scepticism in the industry about whether this is achievable. But Mr Bord says "four out of five people [in flood prone areas] have made a saving of 50 per cent or more on their home insur- ance". China and Australia are among the countries interested in developing a similar scheme and have asked Flood Re for details of how it works.  Flood Re has yet to be fully tested. The years since 2016 have been relatively quiet for UK floods, although recent events such as Fishlake may prove a more rigorous test. It has only dealt with 1,100 claims in total since it was set up, Mr Bord told the Financial Times in Jan- uary, far short of initial expectations that it would deal with 2,000 a year.  $Average claims paid National Insur- ance' since But they have to avoid com- placency, says Mr Bord. "People are tak- ing action, but not fast enough," he says. "If you haven't been flooded, you think  The insurability question Flood experts agree that, in relatively wealthy coun- tries, the price of living near the water must better reflect the risks, to both stop overbuilding and encourage infrastruc- ture investment. Many also believe that private insurance — the free market — offers the best pricing mechanism.  Yet there is a reason that, as Wharton's Ms Kousky says, "there is almost nowhere in the world with a fully pri- vate disaster insurance market". Floods, she says, "are concentrated and correlat- ed risks ... you have lots of quiet years and then a really bad year". This re- quires insurers to hold lots of capital, and therefore charge high premiums.  In some areas high premiums would bring down the prices of prime real es- tate. In others, they would force out low- income residents. The political barriers to either are high.  Barry Gilway, chief executive of Citi- zens, a Florida-based property insurer, uses the example of Florida Keys. "Without subsidisation no homeowner could really afford to live or build in Monroe County due to the extremely high costs of funding the risk.  "After Hurricane Irma [in 2017] they had to rebuild to new building codes.  that  While absolutely appropriate, is very expensive. With no affordable housing and extremely high cost of the US Flood Program 2003 insurance costs, where do all the people in the ser- vice industry live?" A few steps would make the public-private balance easier to achieve. Investment in detailed public flood maps would also help increase risk  awareness and improve underwriting.  The First Street Foundation, a nonprofit group, has begun work on this in the US, but public investment is required. "We need an atlas of flooding," says Sti- jn Van Nieuwerburgh, a property econ- omist at Columbia University. Ms Kousky of Wharton recommends a sys- tem modelled on the way terrorism is in- sured in the US: a private market with insurers backstopped by the govern- ment.  "We want to have some amount of risk- based pricing [but] that's perfectly do- able even with a government backstop at a very high level," she says.  Following the example of the UK, new buildings could be excluded from sub- sidy programmes. Alternatively, people could be given help to make their homes more resilient, so that future floods cause less damage and cost less to re- pair. Flood Re wants to be able to cover victims not just for the costs of repairing damage but also to "build back better".  "Flood risk management cannot be done by the insurance industry alone," says Konrad Schoeck, a flooding specialist at reinsurance group Swiss Re. "It needs to be the insurance industry, the govern- ment and private homeowners."  It may be that the suffering caused by flooding is not yet enough to force hard choices. But with waters continuing to rise that is unlikely to remain the case.  "As levels of risk rise, there will be more questions about uninsurability and what you do about it," says Arno Hilberts, vice-president at risk modelling compa- ny RMS. "You will reach a threshold where insurance systems don't really work."   of financing could help.  "There is a challenge in the way the world pays for disasters, waiting for them to happen and then paying for them, rather than preparing in advance," says Daniel Clarke, the centre's director. Insurance can help but it has to be tai- lored to cover the right risks. "The only thing worse than no insurance is bad in- surance that people rely on and then it doesn't come through."  One of the challenges is to get three very disparate groups — insurance compa- nies, governments and aid agencies — to work together.  "The consequences of the climate crisis such as repeated flooding is ultimately a humanitarian issue. But it's not one that the public sector and charities can solve on their own — we need to collaborate with commercial partners," says Simon Meldrum, a former banker who is now an investment specialist with the British Red Cross. Oliver Ralph Top, flooding caused by Hurricane Harvey in Hous- ton, 2017. Above, floods in São Paulo last week Getty Images; Shutterstock  Floods 'are concentrated and correlated risks ... you have lots of quiet years and then a really bad year'  occur — have want 70% Of the estimat- ed $125bn in damage caused by Hurri- cane Harvey was uninsured Even where the eye-catching, private cover as few But insurers. countries of so-called in- surance' agencies or Milliman. the run- ning sell four or increased very expen- sive.  government NFIP 230m People around the globe at risk from storm surges — about 3% of the population only critics. impression or some While absolutely very has only in Mr insurance' the in- dustry $3.5bn Average annual cost of claims paid by the US National Flood Insurance Program since 2003 public-to detailed also help increase avoid Bord.  but not While wealthy countries such as the US and UK struggle to decide which climate change risks the state should carry, the calculus for poor or middlein- come countries is very different. Avoid- ing the worst impact of floods will cost billions. In Indonesia, Jakarta is slowly sinking, which last year led President Joko Widodo to announce plans for a new capital on Borneo.  estimated damage Hurricane UnInsured Even where the problems are not so eye- catching, there is often little private in- surance in place to cover the growing flood risk as few people can afford it. But there is a role for insurers. One is to help countries finance the cost of deal- ing with floods via so-called parametric insurance policies sold to aid agencies or governments. These policies pay out as soon as a threshold, such as the depth of a flood, is breached.  The Centre for Disaster Protection fund- ed by the UK government has just been set up in London to help countries un- derstand how insurance or other forms 
	of financing could help.

“There is a challenge in the way the world pays for disasters, waiting for them to happen and then paying for them, rather than preparing in advance,” says Daniel Clarke, the centre’s director. Insurance can help but it has to be tailored to cover the right risks. “The only thing worse than no insurance is bad insurance that people rely on and then it doesn’t come through.”

One of the challenges is to get three very disparate groups — insurance companies, governments and aid agencies — to work together.

“The consequences of the climate crisis such as repeated flooding is ultimately a humanitarian issue. But it’s not one that the public sector and charities can solve on their own — we need to collaborate with commercial partners,” says Simon Meldrum, a former banker who is now an investment specialist with the British Red Cross. Oliver Ralph
  