On 7 October 2023, as part of the Hamas-led attack on Israel at the beginning of the Israel–Hamas war, Hamas and other Palestinian militant groups abducted 253 people from Israel to the Gaza Strip, including children, women, and elderly people. In addition to hostages with only Israeli citizenship, almost half of the hostages are foreign nationals or have multiple citizenships. The precise ratio of soldiers and civilians among the captives is unknown. The captives are likely being held in different locations in the Gaza Strip.As of February 14, 2024, 112 hostages were returned alive to Israel, with 105 being released in a prisoner exchange deal, 4 were released by Hamas unilaterally and 3 hostages were rescued by the IDF. 11 bodies of hostages were repatriated to Israel, with 3 of the hostages killed by friendly fire from the IDF and the bodies of 8 hostages repatriated through military operations. 32 hostages were reportedly killed in Hamas captivity according to Israel. According to unconfirmed Israeli intelligence, at least 20 additional hostages may be deceased, with their bodies being held captive in Gaza. As of February 14, 2024, 134 hostages remain in captivity in the Gaza Strip, with 130 hostages abducted on October 7, 2023 and four hostages having been captured earlier.Hamas has offered to release all hostages in exchange for Israel releasing all Palestinian prisoners. By October 2023, Israel held 5,200 Palestinians (including 170 juveniles) in its prisons. Hamas stated its objective was to secure their release. Several countries have been involved in negotiations between Israel and Hamas, with Qatar taking the lead.On 22 November 2023, Israel and Hamas agreed to the release of 150 Palestinian prisoners and a four-day cease-fire in exchange for Hamas's release of approximately 50 of the hostages. The exchange involved hostages from the categories of women and children. As of 30 November 2023, the last day of the ceasefire, 105 civilian hostages had been released, which included 81 people from Israel, 23 Thais and one Filipino. On 12 February 2024, two Argentinian-Israeli civilians were rescued in Operation Golden Hand. As of January 2024, according to Israeli information, Hamas holds 108 hostages alive and 24 bodies.

Background
The issue of hostages and prisoners is considered emotional for both Israelis and Palestinians. Since 1967, 750,000 to 1 million Palestinians have been arrested by Israel. As of October 2023, Israel held over 5,200 Palestinians prisoners, including at least 170 children. (By November 2023, the number of Palestinian prisoners, including suspected militants and Gazans had increased to 10,000.) Some have been convicted of terrorism by Israeli authorities; the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the occupied Palestinian territories describes many convictions as resulting from "a litany of violations of international law, including due process violations, that taint the legitimacy of the administration of justice by the occupying power." About 1,310 Palestinians are held in administrative detention, a practice that allows Israel to detain Palestinians indefinitely without charges or trial. Israel justifies this practice citing security reasons.Hostages have been used as bargaining chips for prisoner exchanges, which is a violation of international law. Hostage-taking and the abduction of civilians are prohibited by international law and are war crimes. Israel had mostly refrained from negotiating with organizations it deemed as terrorists, opting for military or alternative measures to secure the release of hostages. However, Israel has engaged in prisoner exchanges with armed groups on several occasions.Notable incidents include the 1994 kidnapping of Israeli soldier Nachshon Wachsman, resulting in his death during a failed rescue attempt by IDF forces. Hamas actions were at times aimed at disrupting the peace process in the 1990s. In 2006, Israeli soldier Gilad Shalit was captured and held for over five years until a prisoner exchange in 2011. Israel secured his release in exchange for 1,000 Palestinians from Israeli custody, some of whom were trialed as terrorists. However, the United Nations Special Rapporteur on the occupied Palestinian territories describes many convictions as resulting from "a litany of violations of international law, including due process violations, that taint the legitimacy of the administration of justice by the occupying power." About 1,310 Palestinians are held in Administrative detention, a practice that allows Israel to detain Palestinians indefinitely without charges or trial. Israel justifies this practice citing security reasons. The 2014 kidnapping and murder of three Israeli teenagers, Eyal Yifrach, Naftali Fraenkel, and Gilad Shaar, heightened tensions and contributed to opening of Operation Protective Edge in 2014. Hamas has also held the bodies of two slain Israeli soldiers, Hadar Goldin and Oron Shaul, since the 2014 Operation Protective Edge. Additionally, at the time of its attack, Hamas was already holding two Israelis hostage: Ethiopian Israeli Avera Mengistu (since 2014) and Bedouin Israeli Hisham al-Sayed (since 2015). Hamas has also sought to ransom the remains of Israeli soldiers Oron Shaul and Hadar Goldin, which they seized during the 2014 Gaza War. On 31 August 2023, Israel warned its citizens that Hamas was trying to kidnap them.On 7 October 2023, Hamas attacked Israel, initiating the 2023 Hamas-Israel war. The attack resulted in over 1,200 Israeli casualties and the occupation of towns, cities, and military bases by Hamas militants leading to widespread condemnation and accusations of war crimes. The use of hostages, primarily women, children, and the elderly, is highlighted as a violation by Hamas of international humanitarian law.

7 October attacks
On the morning of 7 October 2023, around 6:30 a.m. IST, Palestinian militants led by Hamas launched an attack into Israel from multiple sites on its border with the Gaza Strip. The attack included ground and motorized infiltration into Israeli territory, attacks on Israel Defense Forces bases and exchanges of fire with security forces, massacres and shooting of Israeli civilians, and takeovers of communities and military facilities. The ground incursion was combined with and backed by a sustained barrage of thousands of rockets.At around 7:00 am, militants raided many communities and kibbutzim (intentional communities) in the Gaza periphery area of Israel. They killed civilians and soldiers across many communities resulting in 1,200 deaths. The Economist described the combined attacks as "the biggest terror attack in [Israel's] history".In the initial wave of attacks, militants kidnapped civilians and brought them back to Gaza as captives. According to statements by Hamas and Palestinian Islamic Jihad, around 200 soldiers and civilians were captured or abducted during the raid on the Gaza periphery communities. Rear Admiral Daniel Hagari, an IDF spokesperson, reported on 7 October that military officers were among those captured. Israel confirmed the identity of 203 captives, among them 30 children, while Gaza spokespeople reported holding roughly 200, estimating that another 50 were held by other factions. The IDF says it captured "handbooks" made by Hamas to instruct its militants; these handbooks instructed to "kill the difficult" captives, and use the rest as human shields.
Civilians believed to be held captive in Gaza include families, children, festival-goers, peace activists, caregivers, and older adults. 75-year-old historian Alex Danzig who has written books on Poland's Jewish community and the Holocaust, was taken from Nir Oz. Also at Nir Oz, members of the Bibas family were taken from their home, including an infant and 4-year-old. Images taken by the Associated Press also showed Yaffa Adar being kidnapped.Some of the hostages are from France, Germany, Russia, United Kingdom, and the United States. At least seventeen Thai citizens working in greenhouses in the Gaza periphery were also kidnapped. Nepal confirmed seven of its citizens who, are university students, were kidnapped in Herzliya and ten more Nepalis in Alumim were abducted. At least one Filipino was abducted.

Videos
There is a video depicting at least 64 of the abductees. Video analysis from The Washington Post shows that some of the captives were killed shortly after their capture.On 19 November 2023, the Israeli military released reported CCTV footage that they claim shows hostages being lead into Al – Shifa hospital on 7 October. This was in the wake of Israel being put under pressure to substantiate claims that Hamas was operating an expansive command center under the hospital leading to its siege. However, shortly after the release BBC News indicated that they were unable to independently corroborate the claims and is not the evidence that Israel claimed to have.

Notable hostages
Noa Argamani
Israeli student Noa Argamani, who was at the trance party near Re'im, was kidnapped while with her partner Avinathan Or. They were filmed being taken by the militants to Gaza, after WhatsApp messages they sent asking for help from their hiding place from 8:10 a.m. were exposed. The footage showed Argamani being taken on a motorcycle while reaching out for Or, who was led away by his captors on foot.

Hersh Goldberg-Polin
23-year-old American-Israeli Hersh Goldberg-Polin was abducted by Hamas during the Re'im music festival massacre. During the festival, Hersh took refuge in a field shelter. His friend Aner Shapira died while repelling grenade attacks, and Hersh lost an arm before being abducted. His mother, Rachel Goldberg, has since been vocal in international and diplomatic arenas, including the United Nations and the March for Israel in Washington, D.C., campaigning for his release and demanding humanitarian intervention.

Yarden Roman-Gat
Yarden Roman-Gat, a 36 year old woman who is a dual national of Germany and Israel, along with her husband Alon and their 3-year-old daughter Gefen, were abducted by Hamas militants from their home in Kibbutz Be'eri during the Be'eri massacre and taken towards the Gaza Strip border. Yarden's act of self-sacrifice in saving her daughter during an escape attempt, and her subsequent two-month-long captivity in Gaza, garnered significant attention until her release on 29 November.

Bibas family
Militants abducted the Bibas family from kibbutz Nir Oz during the Nir Oz massacre: 9-month-old Kfir, 4-year-old Ariel, 32-year-old mother Shiri, and her 34-year-old husband Yarden. Shiri's parents, also abducted from their kibbutz, were later found deceased. Efforts to release Shiri and her children during the ceasefire between Israel and Hamas were unsuccessful, leading to claims by Hamas that they were killed in an Israeli airstrike. The Israeli Defense Forces (IDF) expressed doubts about these claims, amidst widespread concern and a campaign for their release.

Treatment of captives
Many hostages require medical treatment due to their medical conditions (such as Parkinson's, cardiovascular diseases, heart failure, diabetes mellitus and cancer), according to a report sent to the ICRC on 15 October by Dr. Hagai Levine of The Hostages and Missing Families Forum. However, as of 5 December Hamas still refuses the ICRC access to the hostages.On 13 October, Hamas released a video purporting to demonstrate its compassion towards abducted children. The video shows armed Hamas militants patting children on the back, rocking children in a stroller, and giving a child water. On 16 October, Hamas released a video of a 21-year-old French Israeli woman pleading to be returned to her family, while someone bandages her injured arm and a scar is visible. A released hostage, who was a nurse, was moved throughout her captivity to treat other hostages and could ask for specific medicines. Although she has alleged the medicines were often in insufficient amounts.Israel’s Health Ministry found that the released hostages lost an average of 17–33 pounds (≈8–15 kilograms) in seven weeks, and they said their diet in captivity was minimal. Professor Gilat Livni, who worked with some of the returned children at Schneider's children's hospital, stated that they were in "generally good condition" but raised caution about the trauma that was faced. A physician advising the families of held hostages also echoed this statement, warning of the trauma faced and the long process of restoring a sense of trust and control after being released.Dr. Renana Eitan, the head of psychiatry at the Ichilov Tel Aviv medical centre, said that among the freed hostages she examined were children drugged by their captors, including with ketamine, and were suffering from withdrawal. Israel's Health Ministry’s confirmed that before they were released, liberated hostages were given psychoactive pills by their captors. Blood tests showed the drug was Clonazepam, commonly used to treat epilepsy, anxiety, OCD and other cases on a short term basis. Reportedly aimed to make the hostages appear calm and happy after enduring prolonged physical abuse, deprivation, and psychological terror in captivity.Prof. Dror Mendel, Director of the Dana-Dwek Children's Hospital, described orthopedic injuries, scarring and burns, and "very low hygiene standards... lice, rashes, skin irritation [and] inflammation". Prof. Ronit Lubetzky, director of the Pediatrics department, stated that some of the children have lost as much as 10 kg of body weight. Prof. Itay Pesach, Director of the Edmond and Lily Safra Children's Hospital, said that patients describe "the entire range of abuse you could dream of... not different from the testimonies of people who came back from the ghetto or concentration camp". Prof. Hagai Levine, who heads the medical and resilience team of the Hostages and Missing Families Forum, spoke on the lacking medical care given to the hostages, physical and psychological abuse, and starvation: "at first there was an implicit assumption that the conditions of captivity by Hamas are reasonable. This assumption no longer exists... The situations is terrible... There's no time. The clock of some [of the hostages] is already ticking." A doctor who treated some of the 110 hostages released from captivity told the Associated Press that at least ten male and female hostages of them were sexually assaulted or abused. He declined to give his name or speak on any further details, claiming to protect the hostages identities.A former IDF mental health officer said returning hostages who have experienced continual psychological trauma will be very cautious about saying anything that endangers other captives. She also stated returning hostages can have "black holes in their memory" and can also express sympathy for their captors due to "Stockholm syndrome". Many hostages told relatives that they were totally isolated from the outside world and had no information about their family members, who in some cases were also kidnapped or killed in the attack. Yaniv Yaacov, the uncle of hostages, said in an event in North Macedonia with the Israeli foreign minister that his two nephews were branded using the exhaust pipe of a motorcycle by Hamas. He alleged it was done so that if they escaped they could be detected through the burn. He also said his nephews were drugged.

Hostage accounts
Hostages released by Hamas later relayed their experiences in captivity, either firsthand, via family members, or through a report from the United Nations:

Adults
85-year-old Yocheved Lifshitz recounted being beaten on the motorcycle ride back to Gaza. She was taken through a network of tunnels, and kept in groups of five people, with each group assigned a guard. Their captors told them that they believed in the Qur'an and would not hurt them. Lifshitz received medical care, one meal a day, and was kept in clean surroundings. She summarized her two weeks in Hamas captivity saying she "went through hell".
Roongarun Wichanguen, the sister of 33-year-old Vetoon Phoome, said that Phoome was not tortured nor assaulted, was well-fed and well-taken-care-of.
According to Merav Mor Raviv, cousin of 54-year-old Keren Munder, she and her 9-year-old son Ohad and 78-year-old mother Ruth ate mostly rice and bread, but neither regularly nor all the time, resulting in both Keren and Ruth losing 6–8 kg in body weight. They were kept isolated from the outside world, slept on improvised benches, and sometimes had to wait up to two hours to go to the bathroom. Ruth recalled having proper meals early in their captivity, and going hungry as the war progressed.
After being released, 84-year-old Elma Avraham was admitted to the Soroka Medical Center in critical condition. Prior to her kidnapping by Hamas, she was diagnosed with several medical conditions and was taking medication, which her relatives say the ICRC refused to accept. According to one of her doctors, she had signs of being handcuffed, and suffered from untreated "chemical wounds".
Eyal Nouri, the nephew of 72-year-old Adina Moshe, said that his aunt was in a room five stories underground, that was only lit for two hours each day. She was fed canned beans and rice, and had not taken a shower for seven weeks.
A Thai citizen who was released by Hamas testified that there was little to eat for the hostages — a pita a day, sometimes a tin of tuna to share between four people, and sometimes a piece of cheese. Held for more than seven weeks, he says they were allowed to shower once. He also stated that the Jewish/Israeli hostages were treated much more harshly: “We were with Israelis, and they were guarded all the time," and "The Jews who were held with me were treated very harshly, sometimes they were beaten with electric cables.”
Philippine citizen Jimmy Pacheco testified that, for some time, he and the other hostages only got briny water and half a pita a day. To survive, he collected pieces of toilet paper and moistened them with humidity that accumulated on the tunnel's walls.
Ella Ben Ami, daughter of 54-year-old Raz Ben Ami, says her mother was humiliated by her captors, and now cherishes "every little thing", like having a towel, a piece of chocolate, or a drink.
The health of 77-year-old Hanna Katzir deteriorated several days after her release. According to her daughter, Carmit Palty Katzir, "she had no heart problems when she was kidnapped, but now she has severe heart problems due to harsh conditions and starvation".
77-year-old Margalit Moses had essential medical equipment confiscated by her kidnappers.
21-year-old Maya Regev and her 18-year-old brother Itay Regev testified to the hunger, harsh environmental conditions, extreme fear and sense of uncertainty that they experienced.
21-year-old Mia Schem recalled having experienced a Holocaust-like hell during captivity in Gaza, stating "Everyone there is a terrorist." Schem said she realized she was being held in a family home during her time in captivity and that the whole family was involved with Hamas, including the women and children. She also said that she was forced to record a video and instructed to say that she was treated well.

Teenagers and children
According to Ahal Besorai, the uncle of 17-year-old Noam and 13-year-old Alma Or, the two were driven out of the safe room in Be’eri, when their captors set the house on fire with them in it. They were captured and driven back to Gaza in a stolen car, with Noam in the trunk and his sister among eight captors at the front. They were kept separated from their father, Dror, who is also believed to have been kidnapped. They both lost weight.
Devora Cohen, the aunt of 12-year-old Eitan Yahalomi, said that he was beaten by Gazan residents and forced to watch videos of the 7 October atrocities. For the first 16 days of his captivity he was kept in isolation; after a month he was joined with a group of hostages from his home kibbutz, whom he knew. Any time he or another child cried, they were threatened with guns to keep quiet.
Thomas Hand, father of 9-year-old Emily Hand, noted that she and the other hostages that were with her always had at least one meal a day, but she was still hungry and lost weight. She was not beaten, but could not make noise and was only allowed to draw and play cards. As a result of the trauma, she continued to talk in whispers even after being released. She referred to her place of captivity as "the box".
Gilad Korngold, grandfather of 3-year-old Yahel and 8-year-old Nave, said that Yahel kept whispering for several days after being released, and Nave doesn't talk at all.
17-year-old Agam Goldstein-Almog described another female hostage in captivity being sexually abused by a guard while she was washing herself in the sink.

Status of captives
On 22 October 2023, a list of the 204 hostages was published.According to Israel, at least 250 additional individuals were captured on the first day of the war, but rescued that day.As of 24 February 2024, Hamas is still refusing to allow International Committee of the Red Cross representatives to meet with the 7 October hostages in Gaza.

Negotiations
Hamas has offered a deal dubbed as "everyone for everyone" or "all for all" — a release of all hostages being held in Gaza in exchange for Israel releasing thousands of Palestinians in Israeli prisons. Some Israeli families have spoken in support for such a deal.Shortly after the October attacks Thailand had been in official talks with Hamas with a group convened by the countries parliamentary speaker Wan Muhamad Noor Matha about the release of their citizens. The group conveyed to Hamas that the citizens were not party to the conflict, but instead part of the around 30,000 Thai laborer's who work in the Israeli agriculture sectors. While some had been captured about 39 were killed in the attacks and about 8,600 repatriated back to Thailand.On 8 November, Hamas sources told news agencies that Hamas could release 10–15 hostages in exchange for a three-day humanitarian pause in fighting. On 9 Nov, Benjamin Netanyahu had reportedly rejected such an exchange. On 13 November it was reported that Hamas had told Qatari mediators that the group was willing to release up to 70 women and children hostages held in Gaza for a five-day truce and the release of 275 women and children held by Israel.On 9 November, Al-Quds Brigades released a video where spokesperson Abu Hamza states that they are prepared for the unconditional release of 77-year old Hanna Katsir, citing humanitarian reasons and their inability to provide her with her specific medical needs, as well as the release of 13-year old Yagil Yaakov. Israel refused the offer, claiming it would play into the captor's "psychological terror". On 21 November, it was erroneously reported that Katsir had died from medical complications, however she was still alive and was released on 24 November. Yagil Yaakov, alongside his older brother, were released on 27 November.On 22 November it was announced that Israel and Hamas had reached an agreement about a cease fire and the release of 50 hostages. While hostages held by Hamas would not be released until 23 November at the earliest, those released would be woman and children, in response the Israeli government would release 150 Palestinian prisoners, more aid would be allowed into Gaza and a four day cease-fire which would be added onto for every 10 additional hostages released. Hamas has acknowledged that of the hostages released children would be the main component of the hostages released, and the IDF has planned that an IDF officer would be on hand to facilitate the crossing and handover with the hostages being transferred into Israel for medical care. As of 26 November, Hamas had released a total of 58 hostages since the ceasefire went into effect, some of whom were foreign nationals and not included in the agreement to release 50 Israelis.

Rescue operations
A captured IDF private was freed on 30 October in an operation headed by the IDF, with assistance from Shin Bet and Mossad. On 8 December, Hamas claimed they repelled an attempted hostage rescue by Israeli special forces, inflicting several military casualties. Hamas also said that a hostage named Sahar Baruch died in the incident. On the same day of 8 December, according to an IDF statement, two Israeli soldiers were wounded in a failed hostage rescue attempt. It is unclear whether the statements of Hamas and the IDF refer to the same event.During the early morning of 12 February 2024, the IDF, Shin Bet and special police forces coupled with airstrikes, rescued two hostages with dual Israel-Argentinian nationality, 60 year-old Fernando Simon Marman and 70 year-old Louis Har, who were kidnapped from Kibbutz Nir Yitzhak on 7 October by Hamas, from a building in Rafah in southern Gaza. One Israeli soldier was injured and 37 Hamas militants, including the hostages' guards, were reported killed during the rescue operation. According to Amnesty International, the operation and airstrikes led to the deaths of at least 95 civilians, including children.

Release of hostages
On 20 October, Hamas released two American hostages for humanitarian reasons and in response to Qatari and US pressure. The International Committee of the Red Cross (ICRC) said it helped facilitate the release of the hostages by transporting them from Gaza to Israel. On 23 October, Hamas released two Israeli women hostages, aged 79 and 85, for humanitarian reasons after mediation by Qatar and Egypt. The ICRC helped transport them out of Gaza. The released hostages were from the Nir Oz kibbutz. One of the released hostages, Yocheved Lifshitz, and her husband Oded, a journalist still in captivity, are known peace activists that helped Palestinians in Gaza get to hospitals in Israel. Lifshitz's daughter Sharone said that Lifshitz and other hostages were held in a "huge network" of tunnels. Lifshitz was critical of both the Shin Bet and the IDF, and the press conference was criticized as a PR disaster for Israel.
On 27 October, a Hamas official said that Hamas could not release the hostages taken during the attack on Israel until a ceasefire is agreed. On 22 November, Israel and Hamas agreed to the release 150 of Palestinian prisoners and a four-day cease-fire in exchange for Hamas's release of approximately 50 of the hostages. On 24 November, the release of 50 women and children hostages by Hamas over a four day period began after negotiations with Israel, with hostages being released into the care of the Red Cross through the Rafah Border Crossing and then to the Israeli Hatzerim Military Base. Some of this group were dual and foreign nationals, with individuals from Israel, Thailand, and the Philippines counted in the first group released.As of 26 November 2023, a total of 41 hostages had been released by Hamas during the four-day ceasefire. Of those released, 26 were Israeli (some being dual citizens) with a breakdown of 13 released on 24 November and 13 on 25 November. In addition, 14 Thai hostages and one Filipino were released as part of a separate deal. An additional 17 hostages (including 14 Israelis and one American) were released on 26 November, in exchange for 39 Palestinian prisoners.Israel published a list of 300 Palestinian prisoners that it would potentially release in exchange for Israeli hostages in Gaza, 287 of which are children below the age of 18. An analysis by NBC News of the list showed about 20% were convicted of a crime, while the roughly 80% of the list were not convicted of any crimes and had either not been prosecuted or had been detained under administrative detention. However, some of the Palestinians prisoners that were freed as part of the deal had been convicted of offenses ranging from attempted murder, to less severe ones such as inflicting property damage, hindering police work or assembling unlawfully. Other offenses included assault of police officers, rock-throwing, hurling firebombs, arson, and possession of firearms or explosives. Some prisoners reportedly belonged to Hamas, Palestinian Islamic Jihad and PFLP.A Russian-Israeli man was released on 26 November outside of the cease fire agreement. Musa Abu Marzouk, an official within Hamas indicated that the release was in appreciation for President Vladimir Putin's position. Putin has been openly critical of the Israeli operation in regards to Gaza and the mounting casualties.

Reported deaths
The IDF confirmed on 13 October that remains of missing Israeli people were located and retrieved in the Gaza Strip. On 14 October, Hamas stated that nine hostages had been killed over a 24-hour period due to Israeli airstrikes. On 4 November, Hamas reported that 60 hostages had died as a result of Israel's bombing of Gaza. An Israeli official responded that "Regardless of what Hamas claims, any harm done to hostages is Hamas's responsibility and they will be held accountable." According to the IDF, half of the hostages were killed during the abduction or died in captivity. At least two bodies of deceased hostages have been recovered, as of 16 November.Along with reported CCTV footage released on 19 November, Israel announced that an IDF soldier who had been captured on 7 October had been killed by Hamas while being held at the Al-Shifa hospital. Hamas denied this and indicated the soldier had been previously reported by them as being killed by an Israeli airstrike on 9 November.On 29 November, Hamas claimed that the youngest hostage; a 10-month old toddler and his 4-year-old brother and mother were killed while in captivity due to Israeli bombings. The claim is being investigated by the IDF and other agencies, and Israeli officials have stated the account shows the "barbarism and cruelty of Hamas".Hamas released a video of the dead body of Arie Zalmanovich, 86, from kibbutz Nir Oz. According to Hamas he died of a heart attack. Zalmanovich had medical conditions and required medical treatment. His son attributed the death to the lack of medicines and suitable food in captivity.On 15 December, the IDF stated that during operations in Shuja'iyya, they "mistakenly identified three Israeli hostages as a threat" and killed them via friendly fire. The three hostages were three men in their 20s, who were identified after having their bodies returned to Israel. According to an Israeli military official on 16 December, the three hostages were shirtless and "they have a stick with a white cloth on it. The [Israeli] soldier feels threatened and opens fire. He declares that they're terrorists"; more Israeli forces shoot, killing two hostages "immediately" and wounding the third hostage, who appealed for help in Hebrew, then "there's another burst of fire [by Israeli forces] towards the third [hostage] and he also dies". Haaretz reported that the third hostage retreated into a building after the other two hostages were shot, with IDF soldiers following the third hostage and shooting him dead because they thought he was a terrorist setting a trap. Yediot Ahronot reported that Israeli soldiers had called for the third hostage to come out of the building he was hiding in, and then shot him when he reappeared. The Israeli military investigated the killings and concluded on December 28 that the Israeli "soldiers carried out the right action to the best of their understanding of the event at that moment".In February 2024 it was announced that through a confidential assessment conducted by Israeli intelligence officials, there were more deceased hostages than previously known. In the report thirty-two of the hostages held in Gaza were declared as deceased, with an additional twenty hostages status still undetermined.

Timeline
Aftermath
As part of Israel's counteroffensive, Israel implemented a "total blockade" of the Gaza strip until the hostages have been released. Amnesty International describes this measure as having been "taken to punish civilians in Gaza for the actions of Palestinian armed groups," amounting to collective punishment. Israel has also undertaken mass detentions of Palestinians in Israel and the Palestinian territories; several Israeli NGOs described the detention of several thousand Gazan workers as a form of retaliation or "vengeance" for the capture of Israeli citizens.
American-Israeli author Robby Berman set up a fund offering a reward of 1 million Israeli shekels for the release of hostages in Gaza, specifically aimed at encouraging Palestinians to aid in the rescue of Jewish prisoners.According to experts, an Israeli ground invasion of the Gaza Strip will endanger the lives of the hostages. U.S. officials said the Biden administration advised Israel to delay the ground invasion of Gaza to allow more time for hostage negotiations. According to Israeli officials, once Israel begins a ground invasion of Gaza, it will be almost impossible to reach a deal on the release of the hostages. On 24 October, US President Joe Biden rejected calls for a ceasefire, stating "We should have those hostages released and then we can talk".

Responses
On 16 October 2023, Hamas leader Ismail Haniyeh and Turkey's Foreign Minister Hakan Fidan discussed the possibility of releasing the hostages taken during the Hamas attack on Israel.In a video released by Hamas, three female hostages are shown. One of the women speaks, and lays the blame for their continued situation on the Israeli government and Israeli Prime Minister Benjamin Netanyahu. She chides the Israeli government's bombing campaign, asking if they wanted all the hostages killed, and asks for the release of all Palestinian prisoners held by Israel.A poll by the Israeli newspaper Maariv, conducted on 18–19 October, found that 65% of Israelis supported a ground invasion of the Gaza Strip and 21% opposed it. In comparison, according to a poll conducted for the same newspaper on 25–26 October, only 29% of Israelis supported an immediate large-scale ground offensive into the Gaza Strip. Maariv said that "It is almost certain that the developments on the matter of the hostages, which is now topping the agenda, have had a great impact on this shift."On 21 February 2024, Finance Minister Bezalel Smotrich stated the hostages' return "is not the most important thing".

Families of hostages and released hostages
Human rights groups, international organizations, and families of those held captive have called for an immediate release of the hostages. On Sunday evening, 8 October, the families of the kidnapped and missing held a press conference, demanding the government open ongoing talks with the families and carry out an operation to bring the missing home, appoint someone to maintain ongoing contact with the families, immediately involve Turkish President Erdogan, Saudi Crown Prince Mohammed bin Salman, and Egyptian President Abdel Fattah el-Sisi, to release the captives. The government appointed Gal Hirsch to be in charge of the issue.On 26 October, the families of the hostages met with Netanyahu. The Hostages and Missing Families Forum, that represents families of the abducted people, complained that no-one had explained "whether the ground operation endangers the well-being of the 229 hostages". The families also raised complaints that the government and Netanyahu had failed to provide updates to the families or meet with them until the meeting on 26 October. Meirav Gonen, a representative for the families, expressed support for a full prisoner swap, stating: "a deal of a return of our family members immediately in the framework of 'all for all' is feasible, and there will be wide national support for this."
On 14 November, it was reported that families of those held hostage began a five-day-long march to Netanyahu's home in Israel to demand action and answers. One family member was quoted as saying they did not feel like they were in good hands, and that they do not get enough information, while another called on the perceived in action of the Israeli government. On 2 December, at a rally outside the IDF headquarters in Tel Aviv, Israeli hostages released by Hamas called for the immediate release of fellow hostages left behind. On 4 December, eight released Israeli hostages wrote a letter to the International Committee of the Red Cross, asking the organization to provide medical assistance and to visit their relatives still being held by Hamas in Gaza. The appeal was made due to reports, that the Red Cross wasn't allowed to visit the hostages since the beginning of the war, as for 29 November.In an early December 2023 meeting with Netanyahu and other members of the war cabinet, family members of those who are still held hostage by Hamas forces showed their outrage and frustration with the continued situation. In a published recording, Netanyahu can be heard blaming the end of the November 2023 cease-fire on Hamas while family members and supporters can be heard calling him a liar. Some former hostages also attended the meeting and spoke about the conditions they were held in, which were exasperated by Israeli airstrikes. One unnamed freed hostage from the kibbutz Nir Oz told Netanyahu: "Every day in captivity was extremely challenging. We were in tunnels, terrified that it would not be Hamas, but Israel, that would kill us, and then they would say Hamas killed you."In January 2024, the mother of Ron Sherman, a deceased hostage whose body was recovered by the IDF, accused the Israeli military of killing her son by filling the tunnel he was in with poison gas. About 20 relatives of hostages still held as captives by Hamas stormed a Knesset finance committee on 22 January, a day after Netanyahu rejected new Hamas conditions for ending the war and releasing the remaining hostages. Many voiced their displeasure at the apparent lack of resolution in having the remaining hostages freed.After a "Settlement Brings Security" (Hebrew: התיישבות מביאה ביטחון, romanized: Hitiashvút Mevi’ávi Takhón Conference was held in Jerusalem on January 28, 2024, sponsored by the right-wing Nachala (Israeli settler organization) pushing for resettlement of the Gaza Strip, many family members expressed their concerns about the conference in context of the crisis. It was strongly criticized for the festive atmosphere, for the movement's forming a perceived impediment to the hostages' release, and for its calls for coerced emigration of Palestinians from their country. One family member stated of the conferencegoers "you're dancing on their blood".A delegation of family members of Israeli hostages, along with several dozen lawyers, went to The Hague to file complaints against Hamas leaders at the International Criminal Court, which is empowered to prosecute individuals for serious violations of the Geneva Conventions that amount to war crimes.

International
On 16 October 2023, a report sent to the International Committee of the Red Cross by the Geneva-based organization Hostage and Missing Families Forum medical team, headed by professor Hagai Levine, said hostages are "in urgent need of treatment and lifesaving medication" and are "prone to immediate mortality." The report also expressed concern about babies requiring infant formula.On 25 October 2023, Qatar's Prime Minister and Foreign Minister Mohammed bin Abdulrahman bin Jassim Al Thani stated that there had been some progress in the hostage negotiations. That same day, World Health Organization Director General Tedros Adhanom Ghebreyesus met with the Hostages and Missing Families Forum and said, "There is an urgent need for the captors of the hostages to provide signs of life, proof of provision of health care and the immediate release, on humanitarian and health grounds, of all those abducted."US State department spokesman, Mathew Miller suggested in response to a question about evidence of Hamas sexual and gender based violence on 7 October, that the reason Hamas was holding on to female Israeli hostages was to prevent them from testifying about their experiences in Hamas captivity.
