  WHAT  NOW  FOR  CLIMATE  JUSTICE?  Social  Movement  Strategies  for  the  Final  Year  of  Struggle  over  the  Next  Universal  Climate  Treaty  First  published  at  COP  20,  Lima,  Peru  -­‐  December  5,  2014  Revised  February  15,  2015  Report  compiled  from  the  ranks  of  climate  justice  advocates  and  groups  by  the  International  Institute  of  Climate  Action  &  Theory    AUTHORS:  Patrick  Bond,  Michael  Dorsey,  John  Foran,  Pascoe  Sabido,  Jim  Shultz,  Nathan  Thanki,  Brian  Tokar,  Richard  Widick,  Emily  Williams,  and  Leehi  Yona  Objectives:  >  to  increase  climate  justice  participation  and  influence  both  inside  the  UN’s  2015  treaty  process  and  outside,  at  the  local  frontlines  of  resistance  to  planet-­‐killing  twentieth-­‐century  fossil  fuel  development;  >  to  put  climate  justice  forces  on  the  record,  on  the  eve  of  adoption  of  the  next  universal  climate  change  treaty,  which  as  currently  unfolding  promises  to  institute  a  neoliberal  path  toward  global  climate  apartheid,  defaunation,  and  ecocide  at  the  hands  of  entrenched  fossil  fuel  interests,  both  private  corporations  and  state-­‐owned  oil,  gas,  and  energy  companies.  ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS:  Special  thanks  to  The  Orfalea  Center  for  Global  &  International  Studies,  at  the  University  of  California,  for  their  generous  support  from  the  earliest  stages  of  this  project;  the  staff  at  the  Department  of  Sociology  at  the  University  of  California,  for  their  logistical  support  over  the  last  four  years,  during  which  John  Foran  and  Richard  Widick  have  represented  the  University  of  California  as  Official  Observer  Delegates  to  the  United  Nations  Framework  on  Climate  Change  Convention  Conferences  of  the  Parties;  and  Robert  Monroe,  Communications  Officer  at  the  Scripps  Institution  of  Oceanography,  University  of  California,  San  Diego,  for  his  excellent  yearly  stewardship  of  the  University  of  California’s  official  delegation  of  Observers  to  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  Conferences  of  the  Parties.  COVER  IMAGE:  View  from  the  Hilton  International  Hotel,  Caracas,  VZ.  Richard  Widick,  2006.  Seattle,  1999  —  Copenhagen,  2009  —  Durban,  2011  1  Table  of  Contents  Problem/Proposals  2  John  Foran  and  Richard  Widick  Introduction  5  Richard  Widick  and  John  Foran  Is  the  Climate  Justice  Movement  9  Ready  to  Scale-­‐jump  Our  Politics?  (No,  not  yet  –  but  we’ll  need  to,  sooner  than  later,  with  Latin  American  counterpower)  Patrick  Bond  Fear  and  Loathing  of  Carbon  Markets:  13  A  Decade  and  Counting  of  Climate  Justice  Agitation  Michael  K.  Dorsey  What  Now  for  Climate  Justice?  18  Re-­‐Imagining  Radical  Climate  Justice  John  Foran  Protecting  Climate  Policy  from  Dirty  Energy  Lobbying:  A  Working  Strategy  Document  Pascoe  Sabido  36  New  Movement  Strategies  43  Jim  Shultz  Integrate  and  Escalate  53  Nathan  Thanki  On  the  Evolution  of  Climate  Justice  56  Brian  Tokar  Global  Activism  and  Global  58  Negotiations:  Stop  Accepting  Climate  Change,  Get  Active!  Emily  Williams  Vision,  Hope,  and  Power:  63  A  Contribution  to  the  Discussion  Leehi  Yona  Appendix:  Climate  Justice  Manifestos  66  Compiled  by  Richard  Widick  and  John  Foran  The  Durban  Declaration  on  Carbon  Trading,  Durban  Group  for  Climate  Justice,  Durban  (October  2004)  Founding  Statement,  Climate  Justice  Now!  Bali  (December  14,  2007)  What  does  Climate  Justice  Mean  in  Europe?  Climate  Justice  Alliance  (February  2010)  People’s  Agreement,  World  People’s  Conference  on  Climate  Change  and  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth,  Cochabamba,  Bolivia  (April  2010)  Universal  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth,  Cochabamba,  Bolivia  (April  27,  2010)  The  Margarita  Declaration  on  Climate  Change,  Margarita  Island,  Venezuela  (July  18,  2014)  A  Zero  Emissions  Manifesto  for  the  Climate  Justice  Movement  (September  2014)  Declaration  of  the  Ecosocialist  International  Network  before  COP20  in  Lima,  Peru  (December  2014)  Contributors  113  2  Problem  The  unfolding  climate  crisis  is  defined  by  constantly  rising  greenhouse  gas  emissions,  accelerating  climate  change,  and  the  ongoing  failure  of  international/UN  and  domestic/state  climate  policy  to:  1)  raise  the  ambition  of  agreed  climate  policy  initiatives  to  the  level  that  basic  climate  science  indicates  is  required  to  limit  average  global  temperature  increase  to  1.5°  degrees  Celsius  (the  Cochabamba  target),  not  +2°C  (the  current  UNFCCC  target),  and  not  +3  °C  (the  implicit  Obama-­‐Jinping  target)  –  while  acknowledging  business  as  usual  is  already  hurtling  us  toward  a  +4°C  world  (the  number  associated  with  the  2012  World  Bank  report  Turn  Down  the  Heat:  Why  a  4°  World  Must  Be  Avoided)1;  2)  establish  an  environmentally  and  socially  just  and  democratic  international  climate  policy  process  that  garners  sufficient  popular  and  civil  society  representation  to  reflect  the  true  depth  of  long-­‐term,  inter-­‐generational  public/common  interest;  and  3)  reflexively  acknowledge  the  ongoing  failure,  over  20  years,  of  carbon  trading  schemes  to  raise  the  price  of  greenhouse  pollution  to  anywhere  near  the  level  necessary  to  incentivize  the  dramatic  shift  to  100%  renewables  required  by  the  UNFCCC’s  deep  decarbonization  mandate,  and  the  related  failure  to  adequately  explore  alternative  approaches  such  as  direct  carbon  taxation  and  public  investment  in  renewable  energy.  1      SP/IB//_20121220072749/Rendered/  PDF/NonAsciiFileName0.pdf  Proposals  Develop  a  coordinated  “inside/outside”  strategy  for  climate  justice  politics  and  social  movements  in  relation  to  the  UN  climate  talks,  based,  as  we  see  it,  on:  1)  Encouraging  and  participating  in  globally-­‐  oriented  but  locally-­‐grounded  scholarship,  class  and  environmental  politics,  and  social  movement  struggles  linking  organic,  site-­‐  specific,  bottom-­‐up  resistance  campaigns  against  carbon  mal-­‐development,  with  simple  messaging  aimed  at…  2)  forcing  developed,  principal  emitter  states  (namely,  US,  China  and  the  European  Union,  and  increasingly  Brazil,  Russia,  India,  Canada,  Australia,  and  South  Africa)  to  put  forward  strong  domestic  policy  that  enables  and  promotes  higher  ambition  at  the  UN  climate  talks,  especially  as  these  concern  the  next  universal  climate  treaty,  both  in  its  substance  and  in  the  ratification  struggles  to  follow.  Concretely,  1  and  2  mean  participating  in  local  struggles;  being  the  voices  in  local  struggles  that  push  for  linkage  across  municipal,  state,  regional,  and  member  state  climate  justice  constituencies;  arguing  that  now  is  the  time  for  direct  action  civil  disobedience  against  fossil  fuel  mal-­‐  development,  and  that  the  message  of  these  civil  disobedience  campaigns  must  be  globally  focused,  while  explicitly  aimed  at  developing  home-­‐state  domestic  political  will  to:  a)  put  a  global  price  on  carbon  (using  regulation  and  taxes,  not  markets);  b)  raise  ambition  at  the  UN  climate  talks  (i.e.,  raise  the  targets  to  indicate  50  percent  collective  reductions  by  2025  and  95  percent  by  2040);  c)  ramp  up  “additional”  (i.e.  not  already  counted  or  committed)  and  democratically  accountable  public  financing  of  all  the  UNFCCC  climate  3  funds  (Green  Climate  Fund,  Special  Adaptation  Fund,  Loss  and  Damage  Mechanism),  and  d)  transform  intellectual  property  rights  to  drive  sustainable  technology  transfers.  3)  Creating  a  Global  Public  Council  on  Environmental  Economic  Truth  and  Reconciliation  (or  some  such-­‐named  entity)  charged  with  open  and  transparent  evaluation  of  UNFCCC  participation,  publication,  and  public  commentary  produced  by  corporations,  civil  society  and  social  movements,  and  member  state  governments;2  4)  Mobilizing  support  for  and  increasing  the  visibility  of  public  scholarship  in  the  service  of  climate  justice  politics,  by  means  of  critical  analysis  of:  a)  the  power  and  politics  of  the  one  percenters;  i.e.,  elevation  of  class  politics  to  the  front  of  the  environmental/climate  justice  agenda;  b)  carbon  markets  and  state  subsidies  to  fossil  fuel  corporations  and  state  oil  companies;  c)  the  climate  skepticism  industry;  –  for  example,  by  raising  the  example  of  the  Koch  brothers  to  yet  higher  and  more  transparent  visibility  and  using  the  case  to  publicize  the  political  malevolence  of  the  one  percent.  5)  Globalizing  the  university  fossil  fuel  divestment  movement  in  ways  that  recognize  the  need  and  right  of  the  global  South  for  2  For  reference  see  the  efforts  of  EcoEquity  in  this  direction,  their  Climate  Equity  Reference  Calculator,  and  Climate  Equity  Pledge  Scorecard.  See  also  Norden’s  2014  Report  Equity  and  spectrum  of  commitments  in  the  2015  agreement.  sustainable  development  and  the  well-­‐being  of  peoples.  6)  Ideological  Struggle  within  the  leadership  of  climate  social  movements  in  favor  of  neutralizing  the  forces  of  neoliberalism  that  are  presently  blocking  domestic  US  climate  policy  and  in  general  inhibiting  ambition  within  the  UN  policy  apparatus.  Concretely  this  means,  a)  In  the  US,  arguing  for  constant  attack  on  Republican  denialism  and  the  “climate  lies”  industry/funding  apparatus  (again  the  Koch  example);  b)  again,  developing  a  climate  truth  commission/court,  wherein  an  independent  body  investigates  the  claims  of  the  carbon  capitalists  and  traders,  evaluating  the  carbon  markets  and  market-­‐based  solutions  already  instituted  and  or/planned  by  the  UN;  c)  developing  a  left  front  within  climate  justice  politics  unified  against  false  market-­‐based  solutions.  7)  Continuing  to  develop  climate  justice  philosophy,  politics,  and  policy  initiatives  toward  the  horizon  of  global  environmental  and  social  justice,  and  away  from  global  social  and  environmental  apartheid.  Basic  principles  of  Climate  Justice  philosophy  and  politics:  all  people  –  poor  and  rich  –  have  an  equal  right  to  participate  in  climate  politics  at  every  scale,  and  to  share  the  social  wealth  and  security  afforded  by  sustainable  development,  as  dictated  by  the  carbon  budget  afforded  by  the  natural  limits  of  planet  earth,  as  determined  by  agreed  climate  science.  8)  Further  development  of  Climate  Justice  as  cultural  politics  –  this  is  the  ongoing  search  for  and  production  of  new  meanings  and  new  ways  of  making  and  disseminating  meaning;  new  definitions  of  wealth  and  well-­‐being  4  (buen  vivir;  Ubuntu);  new  framings  and  understandings  of  how  human-­‐made  laws  produce  markets  that  compel  both  state  and  private  firms  and  corporations  to  externalize  costs  onto  labor  and  environment;  new  ethics  for  a  new  planet  marked  forever  more  by  climate  change.  5  Introduction  Richard  Widick  and  John  Foran  Power  concedes  nothing  without  demand,  demand  achieves  nothing  without  struggle,  and  this  time,  struggle  will  achieve  nothing  without  conviction  expressed  in  direct  action  civil  disobedience  aimed  at  preventing  carbon  mal-­‐development.  Climate  Deadline  –  Paris  2015.  The  nations  will  adopt  the  next  universal  climate  treaty.  That  treaty  is  now  being  written3  for  presentation  as  a  draft  text  at  the  crucial  South  American  COP  in  Lima,  offering  policy  designs  for  limiting  future  global  average  maximum  atmospheric  warming  to  a  stated  maximum  increase  of  no  more  than  two  degrees  Celsius/3.6  degrees  Fahrenheit  (although  science  tells  us  that  1.5  degrees  would  be  a  lot  less  risky,  and  social  science  tells  us  that  would  be  a  herculean  feat).  But  the  national  contributions  to  the  new  treaty  made  so  far  suffer  from  lack  of  ambition,  indicate  ongoing  policy  deadlock  and  scandalously  deficient  finance  for  adaptation,  and  thus  presage  a  future  more  likely  defined  by  global  average  warming  of  four,  six,  or  even  ten  degrees  Celsius.  Will  the  new  treaty  aiming  at  two  degrees,  but  likely  to  shoot  higher,  determine  a  path  toward  global  climate  apartheid,  further  separating  the  world’s  haves  and  have-­‐nots  3  Read  the  NEGOTIATING  TEXT,  published  by  the  UNFCCC  at  the  conclusion  of  the  Geneva  Climate  Change  Conference  on  February  22,  2015:    ng_text_12022015@2200.pdf  Follow  the  National  Submissions  to  the  New  Treaty  here:    x?showOnlyCurrentCalls=1&populateData=1&expectedsubm  issionfrom=Parties&focalBodies=ADP  ;  Find  the  key  documents  also  archived  and  analyzed  by  the  corporate  group  C2es  here:    issues-­‐submissions-­‐adp-­‐2014.  into  two  great  classes  of  climate  winners  and  losers?  Or  will  it  instead  set  a  course  toward  Climate  Justice  and  a  more  livable  future  for  all  of  the  world’s  children  and  their  children,  and  of  course  the  animal  nations  and  ecologies  on  which  all  people  depend  for  every  kind  of  economic,  cultural,  and  spiritual  sustenance?  This  IICAT  report  compiles  and  presents  a  range  of  strategy  statements,  analysis,  and  documents  from  advocates  for  the  path  toward  justice  and  away  from  climate  apartheid.4  Our  principal  purpose  in  producing  this  report  is  to  address  the  hydra-­‐headed  specter  of  mutually  reinforcing  and  viciously  interconnected  environmental,  economic,  and  politico-­‐military  crises  that  are  haunting  the  globe  and  inflicting  massive  harm  on  populations  everywhere  -­‐-­‐  especially  the  poorest  and  most  vulnerable  in  every  country  and  region.  With  the  stakes  so  high,  climate  justice  demands,  on  one  hand,  a  massive  re-­‐making  of  both  domestic  and  global  climate  governance  and  development  policy,  and,  on  the  other,  an  even  more  massive  transformation  of  everyday  life  and  consumption  habits,  especially  in  the  developed  world,  with  a  corresponding  provision  of  the  rights  and  requirements  of  life  for  all  peoples  and  species.  *  *  *  *  4  We  hope  in  the  future  to  expand  this  range  to  include  more  and  diverse  voices,  especially  from  women,  the  global  south,  and  additional  public  sectors  or  interests.  Please  contact  us  with  your  feedback  and  with  any  proposal  that  you  have  for  participation  in  this  open-­‐ended  project.  6  Hitherto  demands  alone  have  not  been  effective.  The  structural  violence  of  today’s  fossil  fuel-­‐  driven  status  quo  against  the  99  percent  indicates  the  time  is  near  when  people  will  begin  taking  whatever  actions  are  necessary.  We  are  entering  the  next  stage  of  the  climate  wars,  as  evidenced,  for  example,  in  the  tar  sands,  fracking,  mountain-­‐top  coal  removal,  and  fossil  fuel  divestment  struggles  of  recent  years  in  North  America.  In  every  case,  defenders  of  these  front  lines  are  fighting  their  own  battles  against  powerful  opponents.  Meanwhile,  in  the  less  industrially  developed  world,  largely  in  the  global  south,  forests  are  cut  down  to  send  beef  to  McDonalds,  workers  are  exploited  to  create  the  plastic  junk  that  fills  the  oceans  and  garbage  dumps  of  the  world,  indigenous  peoples,  peasants,  and  women  and  children  everywhere  see  their  lands  taken.  The  species  experience  degradation  of  their  environments  and  the  wanton  taking  of  their  bodies,  the  rising  seas  encroach  on  the  precious  drinking  water  of  small  island  states,  and  storms  and  droughts  force  populations  out  of  their  homes  into  uncertain  journeys.  These  campaigns  and  tragic  transformations  are  postcards  from  one  possible  and  unhappy  future,  in  which  business  as  usual  pushes  global  warming  over  the  tipping  point  into  runaway  climate  change,  and  desperation  forces  peoples  into  motion,  hopefully  first  of  all  into  the  streets,  as  was  recently  witnessed  at  the  People’s  Climate  Marches  in  New  York  City  and  around  the  world,  and  not  toward  violence.  *  *  *  *  Redistribution  must  become  the  principal  demand  and  strategy  for  climate  justice.  As  you  will  see  in  what  follows,  the  unfolding  climate  crisis  profoundly  expresses  the  inequalities  that  the  modern  world  economic  (culture)  system  has  delivered.  Inequality  between  and  within  nations  has  marched  in  step  with  the  accumulation  of  obscene  profits  and  wealth  in  the  era  of  globalization,  the  origins  of  which  are  roughly  contemporary  with  the  dawning  awareness  of  the  climate  crisis  in  the  late  1980s.  In  1999,  the  three  wealthiest  individuals  in  the  world  controlled  assets  equivalent  to  the  GNPs  of  the  48  poorest  countries  on  the  planet.  Today,  the  world’s  85  richest  individuals  own  more  wealth  than  the  bottom  half  of  the  planet’s  total  population.5  Northern  oil  politics,  militarism,  and  new  forms  of  neo-­‐colonial  state-­‐making  further  maintain  and  deepen  this  grotesque  and  inhumane  inequality  in  today’s  political,  economic,  and  environmental  landscapes  of  struggle,  and  this  must  be  recognized  and  foregrounded  in  climate  justice  politics.  Concentrated  wealth  is  the  principal  weapon  of  the  one  percent.  The  economic  problem  is  one  of  maldistribution,  not  scarcity,  and  justice  requires  redistribution,  and  a  long  overdue  check  on  wealth  and  privilege  in  the  global  North.  Tactically,  the  entrenched  fossil  fuel-­‐inflated  power  of  the  global  one  percent,  their  free  market  fantasies,  and  their  bought  and  paid  for  culture  of  deception  and  deceit  must  be  5  OXFAM  Briefing  Paper  178:  Working  for  the  Few:  Political  Capture  and  Economic  Inequality  (January  20,  2014),  .  7  countered  and  dismantled.  They  are  the  ones  who  every  day  operate  outside  and  above  the  law  to  maintain  their  edge.  Theirs  is  the  politics  of  criminality.  Russian  “capitalism”  is  plutocratic.  China  openly  argues  the  virtues  of  authoritarian  state  capitalism.  US  capitalism  is  in  actuality  more  of  a  nanny-­‐state  socialism  for  the  corporations.  South  Africa  is  a  kind  of  proto-­‐  Stalinist  industrial  experiment.  Welfarist  versions  of  capitalism  barely  persist  in  Scandinavia  and  a  few  other  places.  Meanwhile,  in  the  twenty-­‐year-­‐old  climate  negotiations  held  under  the  auspices  of  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC),  carbon  trading  and  marketized  programs  and  institutions  of  one  variety  or  another  have  come  to  dominate  the  entire  spectrum  of  initiatives  from  climate  finance  to  loss  and  damage,  ever  since  the  grand  deception  perpetrated  by  Al  Gore  at  the  negotiations  for  the  1997  Kyoto  Protocol  first  put  on  the  table  a  basket  of  so-­‐called  “market  solutions.”  Industry  leaders  and  champions  of  this  neoliberalization  of  climate  policy  continue  to  enthusiastically  promote  market  solutions  while  papering  over  concrete  evidence  of  their  failure.  A  simple  look  at  carbon  trading  prices  indicates  that  the  carbon  markets  are  utterly  incapable  of  fulfilling  their  official  mandate  of  putting  a  price  on  carbon  that  would  incentivize  lower  global  emissions  and  stimulate  demand  and  direct  investment  into  renewables.  Climate  Justice:  One  No,  Many  Yeses.  Climate  Justice  advances  a  “great  refusal”  of  the  dominant  myths  guiding  political  economic  activity  in  today’s  world  –  that  endless  growth  is  environmentally  sustainable;  that  the  “capitalisms”  at  work  today  can  reduce  inequality  and  deliver  the  material,  cultural,  and  spiritual  requirements  for  living  well  to  the  whole  world;  or  that  global  ecology  can  be  sustained  as  long  as  the  belief  reigns  that  the  world’s  flora  and  fauna  exist  solely  for  whatever  reckless  purpose  private  interests  can  dream  up.  A  deepened,  more  participatory  democracy  must  therefore  rise  against  the  anarchy  of  what  today  is  reductively  called  capitalism,  but  which  might  better  be  described  as  the  litany  of  economic  arrangements  engineered  according  to  the  arbitrary  rule  of  too  often  morally  bankrupt  authoritarian  states  and  corrupt  pseudo-­‐democracies  that  too-­‐largely  serve  as  the  lap-­‐dogs  of  local,  national,  and  global  capital  formations.  The  appropriate  weapon  to  wield  against  them  is  the  participatory  politics  of  popular  regulation  and  control,  with  the  return  of  collective  faith  in  governance  measured  out  in  proportion  to  the  forced  withdrawal  of  capital  from  the  political  arena  (by  which  we  mean,  for  example,  that  progressive  campaign  finance  reform  in  the  US  is  a  prerequisite  for  reinvestment  of  faith  in  governance  for  and  by  the  people,  not  the  corporations).  Henceforth,  the  climate  justice  movement  should  use  any  and  all  the  tools  at  its  disposal  to  everywhere  oppose  the  planet-­‐killing  twentieth-­‐century  energy  technologies  advanced  by  the  politicians,  financiers,  shareholders,  and  the  apologists  of  carbon-­‐  fueled  mal-­‐development.  It  is  time  for  the  social  movements  to  rise  to  this  occasion  with  conviction,  expressed  first  of  all  in  the  practice  of  direct  action  civil  disobedience  at  the  front  lines  of  planetary  eco-­‐defense,  and,  equally  importantly,  continue  offering  constructive  alternatives  to  the  status  quo,  business-­‐as-­‐usual  economic,  political,  and  8  climate  policies  that  are  driving  the  unfolding  climate  crisis.  Along  these  lines,  as  we  see  it,  the  future  of  Climate  Justice  must  begin  with  an  honest  look  at  the  present  moment.  Toward  that  end,  we  offer  this  report.  9  Is  the  Climate  Justice  Movement  Ready  to  Scale-­‐jump  Our  Politics?  (No,  not  yet  –  but  we’ll  need  to,  sooner  than  later,  with  Latin  American  counterpower)  Patrick  Bond  Global  pessimism  and  local  optimism  have  recently  characterised  Climate  Justice  (CJ)  scale  politics:  paralysis  above,  movement  below.  It  may  be  opportune  to  now  re-­‐assess  global  environmental  governance  as  a  site  of  struggle,  one  that  has  proven  so  frustrating  over  the  past  two  decades.  It  is  time  again  to  ask,  specifically,  can  hundreds  of  successful  episodes  in  which  communities  and  workers  resist  greenhouse-­‐  gas  generation  (“Blockadia”  is  Naomi  Klein’s  term  for  the  newly  liberated  spaces)  or  seed  local  post-­‐carbon  alternatives,  now  accumulate  into  a  power  sufficient  to  shape  climate  negotiations?  My  answer  is,  unfortunately,  not  yet.  We  need  to  become  much  stronger  and  more  coherent  in  rebuilding  the  CJ  movement,  once  so  full  of  hope,  from  2007-­‐09,  but  since  then  in  the  doldrums,  even  though  individual,  mostly  disconnected  activist  initiatives  have  deserved  enormous  admiration,  no  more  so  than  in  the  Americas.  In  Lima,  Peru,  the  twentieth  annual  United  Nations  “Conference  of  the  Polluters”  –  “UN  COP20”  –  comes  on  the  heels  of  two  world  attention-­‐grabbing  policy  events:  a  United  Nations  special  summit  in  September  just  after  a  400,000-­‐strong  Manhattan  people’s  march  and  Wall  Street  blockade,  and  the  Washington-­‐Beijing  emissions-­‐timetable  deal  in  November.  The  COP20  offers  a  chance  to  gauge  the  resulting  balance  of  forces,  especially  in  the  critical  Andean  countries  where  melting  mountain  glaciers  and  shrinking  Amazonian  jungles  meet.  Here,  combinations  of  the  world’s  most  radical  conceptions  of  nature’s  integrity  (“Rights  of  Mother  Earth,”  sumak  kawsay  and  buen  vivir)  combine  with  concrete  struggles  –  some  highly  effective  –  to  transcend  the  destruction  of  nature  or  its  commodification.  In  my  experience,  the  world’s  most  visionary  CJ,  post-­‐capitalist  politics  are  fused  when  Ecuador’s  Acción  Ecologica  eco-­‐feminists  find  indigenous  movement  allies  and  solidarity  activists  across  the  world.  The  Quito  NGO  had  long  explored  the  question  of  the  Global  North’s  “ecological  debt”  to  the  South  and  to  the  planet,  but  it  was  when  oil  drilling  was  proposed  in  the  Yasuni  National  Park  that  the  stakes  were  raised  for  both  Action  Ecologica  and  the  Confederation  of  Indigenous  Nationalities.  They  lost  the  first  rounds  of  the  battle:  first,  shaming  Germany  and  Norway  into  making  payments  to  leave  the  oil  in  the  soil  (a  total  of  $5  billion  was  demanded,  as  a  down  payment  on  the  North’s  climate  debt),  and  second,  once  the  money  was  deemed  insufficient,  a  national  referendum  to  protect  Yasuni  (regardless  of  payments)  was  not  treated  fairly  by  Ecuador’s  extractivist  ruling  class.  That  struggle  and  others  like  it  –  e.g.  Bolivia’s  notorious  proposed  forest  highway,  TIPNIS  –  have  forced  onto  the  progressive  agenda  this  uncomfortable  dilemma:  are  the  “pink”  governments  of  Rafael  Correa  in  Ecuador  and  Evo  Morales  in  Bolivia  –  as  well  as  of  Nicolas  Maduro  in  nearby  Venezuela  –  capable  of  generating  serious  eco-­‐socialist  policies  consistent  with  their  leaders’  rhetoric?  Or  instead,  are  the  new  elites  irretrievably  petro-­‐  Keynesian,  petro-­‐Indigenous  and  petro-­‐  10  Socialist,  respectively,  with  radical  climate  politics  foiled  by  their  economies’  carbon  rentiers?  In  Peru  itself,  the  current  regime  of  Ollanta  Humala  swept  into  power  in  2011  on  a  pinkish  electoral  platform.  Yet  the  mining  sector  has  since  boomed,  with  disastrous  impacts  in  the  highlands  and  Amazon  alike.  Recall  that  in  2009,  the  Awajun  and  Wampis  Peoples  and  the  Interethnic  Association  for  Development  of  the  Peruvian  Jungle  (Aidesep)  blockaded  roads  in  Bagua,  leading  to  a  confrontation  with  the  military  that  left  38  dead  and  200  wounded.  As  Aidesep’s  leader  Alberto  Pizango  put  it,  “Thanks  to  the  Amazonian  mobilizations  I  can  say  that  today  the  indigenous  agenda  is  not  only  inserted  in  the  national  level  and  within  the  State,  but  on  the  international  level.”  Yet  Pizango  and  52  others  are  in  the  midst  of  being  prosecuted  for  that  protest.  And  profiteers  continue  to  apply  pressure.  To  his  credit,  Peruvian  Environment  Minister  Manuel  Pulgar-­‐Vidal  admits  that  thanks  to  the  threat  of  the  “forestry  market  of  carbon,  people  are  losing  trust  and  confidence  around  that  mechanism.  People  are  thinking  that  it  can  create  conditions  to  lose  their  land.”  Still,  Pulgar-­‐Vidal  believes  safeguards  will  be  sufficient.  At  an  Indonesian  forest  debate  in  May,  he  asked,  “What  kind  of  incentives  can  we  create  to  bring  the  business  sectors  to  the  forest?”  He  praised  Unilever  as  “a  good  example  of  how  a  private  sector  [firm]  can  play  a  more  active  role  regarding  the  forest.”  Expressing  faith  in  the  “green  economy,”  Pulgar-­‐Vidal  continued,  “What  we  need  to  do  is  to  address  the  problem  of  the  value  of  the  carbon  bond  around  the  forest.  The  current  prices  are  creating  a  lack  of  interest  …  [and]  disincentives  to  have  the  business  sector  and  the  investor  more  close  to  the  forestry  sector.”  This  sort  of  vulgar-­‐capitalist  COP  hosting  is  not  a  coincidence.  The  four  preceding  COPs,  in  Poland,  Qatar,  South  Africa  and  Mexico,  witnessed  dominant  local  state  actors  co-­‐  presiding  alongside  UN  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC)  secretary  Christiana  Figueres.  Following  the  power  logic  within  their  national  power  blocs,  they  remained  universally  addicted  to  hydro-­‐  carbon  exploitation,  with  logical  COP  results.  Likewise,  the  UNFCCC  appears  addicted  to  market  mechanisms  as  alleged  solutions  to  climate  chaos,  even  after  the  breakdown  of  the  two  main  carbon  trading  schemes:  in  the  European  Union,  which  suffered  a  90%  price  crash  since  2008,  and  US  where  the  Chicago  Climate  Exchange  (self-­‐interestedly  promoted  by  Al  Gore)  suffered  a  fatal  heart  attack  in  2011.  Nevertheless,  the  UNFCCC  and  World  Bank  express  high  hopes  for  a  new  generation  of  carbon  trading  and  offsets  in  California,  a  few  major  Chinese  cities  and  a  layer  of  middle-­‐sized  economies  including  South  Korea,  Brazil  and  South  Africa.  In  other  words,  ruling-­‐class  personalities  still  shape  global  climate  politics  far  more  than  CJ  activists,  as  witnessed  in  the  futility  with  which  the  latter  have  attempted  to  influence  the  UN’s  Green  Climate  Fund.  Between  the  coal,  oil  and  mining  barons  who  rule  over  recent  COP  hosts  on  the  one  hand,  and  a  former  carbon  trader  (Figueres)  who  rules  the  UNFCCC  on  the  other,  there  has  never  been  any  possibility  for  getting  the  CJ  perspective  a  seat  at  the  global  table.  In  any  case,  each  national  delegation  comes  to  each  COP  with  the  agenda  of  maximizing  11  the  interests  of  its  own  corporations,  which  tend  to  prominently  include  those  with  industrial  or  fossil  fuel  assets  and  the  need  to  emit  more  and  more  gases.  A  Conference  of  Polluters  it  will  remain  until  that  structural  flaw  is  solved.  The  COPs  are  also  stymied  because  the  US  State  Department’s  main  negotiator,  Todd  Stern,  looms  over  the  proceedings  like  a  smug  vulture  during  a  deadly  drought.  Thanks  to  Edward  Snowden’s  revelations  about  Washington’s  surveillance  capacity,  we  recently  learned  how  Stern  and  US  President  Barack  Obama  cheated  their  way  through  the  “Hopenhagen”  climate  summit  in  2009  by  listening  in  on  the  competition’s  cell  phones,  rendering  hopeless  a  genuine  deal  that  would  enforce  emission  cuts.  And  thanks  also  to  Chelsea  Manning  and  WikiLeaks  providing  us  those  250  000  confidential  State  Department  cables,  we  know  that  the  weeks  after  the  Copenhagen  fiasco  were  spent  by  Stern  and  his  colleagues  cajoling,  bullying  and  bribing  so  hard  that  they  purchased  (for  a  lousy  $50  million  in  aid)  even  the  tough-­‐sounding  Maldives  Island  leadership  whose  famous  scuba-­‐gear-­‐  adorned  underwater  cabinet  meeting  stunt  in  late  2009  dramatized  that  sinking  feeling.  As  a  result  of  our  awareness  about  Washington’s  COP  corruption,  might  the  growing  US  climate  activist  community  become  sufficiently  brave  as  to  test  their  budding  civil  disobedience  muscles  neck-­‐  locking  Stern  and  John  Kerry?  Could  they,  for  example,  prevent  the  US  delegates  from  departing  Washington  for  Lima?  (Comrades,  a  timely  blockade  of  the  I-­‐66  highway  and  Dulles  Airport  Access  Road  would  do  the  trick.)  And  please  add  to  that  “no  pasaran”  list  the  COPs’  saboteurs  from  Ottawa,  Canberra  and  Tokyo,  too.  Still,  such  leaders  and  delegations  are  rarely  much  more  than  the  personification  of  the  class  power  wielded  by  leading  fractions  of  capital  over  labour.  It  is  in  a  structural  critique  of  capitalist,  patriarchal,  racist-­‐colonialist  and  anti-­‐ecological  systems  that  we  annually  find  the  COP  elites  sorely  wanting.  Still,  even  if  we  can  conclude  ahead  of  time  that  the  COP20  will  break  even  NGO  reformers’  hearts,  as  have  all  others  since  Kyoto  in  1997,  this  event  is  important.  It  serves  CJ  activists  as  a  platform  for  highlighting  Latin  American  struggles.  It  will  also  nurture  the  flowering  activists  who  went  to  the  CJ-­‐oriented  pre-­‐COP  prep-­‐coms  in  Venezuela  twice  this  year.  And  it  offers  a  warm-­‐up  protest  –  more  fearsome  to  COP  elites  than  tame  Warsaw’s  or  Durban’s,  we  might  safely  predict  –  for  the  “big  one”  in  Paris:  the  COP21.  In  August  this  year,  French-­‐based  activists’  prep  meeting  generated  visions  of  shutting  down  Paris,  and  identifying  a  date  in  early  December  2015  for  a  global  mass  protest  and  closure  of  educational  institutions  as  the  youth  find  their  voices.  One  reason  we  must  continue  investing  political  energies  below  and  condemning  elites  above  –  i.e.,  not  getting  lulled  into  COP-­‐  reformism  –  is  because  more  people  are  asking  the  question  posed  after  Copenhagen  in  relation  to  the  UNFCCC  (as  we  did  at  Seattle  in  relation  to  the  WTO  in  1999):  “fix  it  or  nix  it”?  After  all,  the  World  Bank  and  IMF  are  now  regularly  considered  last-­‐century  institutions  given  their  incapacities,  and  the  US  dollar  is  apparently  being  terminally  weakened  by  the  12  Federal  Reserve’s  printing-­‐press  dilution  and  by  the  coming  liberalized  yuan  trade.  Isn’t  the  UN  also  destined,  as  Tariq  Ali  put  it  after  the  US-­‐UK  2003  Iraq  invasion  was  endorsed  in  the  UN  General  Assembly,  “to  go  the  way  of  the  League  of  Nations”?  The  UNFCCC’s  irrelevance  at  the  time  of  its  greatest  need  and  responsibility  will  be  one  of  our  descendants’  most  confounding  puzzles.  After  Copenhagen,  illusions  promoted  by  stodgy  Climate  Action  Network  member  groups  under  the  slogan  “Seal  the  Deal!”  were  dashed.  As  350.org’s  Bill  McKibben  put  it,  the  presidents  of  the  US,  Brazil,  China,  South  Africa  and  India  (the  latter  four  termed  BASIC)  “wrecked  the  UN”  by  meeting  separately  and  agreeing  to  eventually  make  merely  voluntary  commitments.  Now  add  (Kyoto-­‐reneging)  Russia  to  the  BASICs  and,  as  the  BRICS,  the  economic  agenda  signaled  at  their  Fortaleza,  Brazil  summit  in  July  this  year  boils  down  to  financing  infrastructure  to  ensure  more  rapid  extraction,  climate  be  damned.  Still,  the  insolence  of  the  Obama  Administration  outshines  the  BRICS,  when  cutting  another  exclusive  side  deal  so  soon  before  Lima  and  Paris.  This  month’s  climate  pact  with  China  clarified  to  CJers  how  much  more  pressure  is  needed  from  below  if  we  are  to  maintain  warming  below  the  2  degrees  threshold  (not  the  Obama-­‐Jinping  3+  degrees).  Yet  it  reduces  pressure  to  hammer  out  a  genuinely  binding  global  deal  with  sharp  punishments  for  emissions  violations,  plus  the  needed  annual  climate  debt  payments  of  several  hundred  billion  dollars  from  polluters  to  climate  victims.  As  a  result,  rising  activist  militancy  is  ever  more  vital,  as  the  window  for  making  the  North’s  (and  BRICS’)  massive  emissions  cuts  begins  to  close  tight.  Although  probably  too  optimistic  about  what  can  be  done  at  the  COPs,  John  Foran  is  correct  on  all  the  other  strategies.  For  example,  he  seeks  movement  below,  e.g.  from  the  US-­‐based  Climate  Justice  Alliance,  Global  Climate  Convergence  and  System  Change  Not  Climate  Change  networks  that  did  such  an  impressive  job  radicalizing  the  previously  prevailing  (bland  Avaaz)  discourses  at  the  People’s  Climate  March  in  New  York.  As  miserable  as  the  balance  of  forces  appears  in  Lima,  nevertheless  all  of  us  in  the  CJ  community  have  been  inspired  by  Andean  activists:  by  the  campaign  against  oil  extraction  from  Yasuni,  by  the  $8.6  billion  ecological  debt  battle  against  the  legacy  of  oil  spills  by  Texaco  (now  Chevron)  nearby,  and  by  the  region’s  indigenous  resistance  to  privatized  trees  in  the  form  of  Reducing  Emissions  through  Deforestation  and  forest  Degradation  (REDD).  If  REDD  is  a  chosen  battleground  for  the  most  advanced  Latin  American  activists,  then  the  worry  is  that,  like  the  Cancun  COP16  in  2010,  men  like  Humala  and  Pulgar-­‐Vidal  will  divide  and  rule  civil  society  with  patronage  pay-­‐offs.  The  possibility  of  consolidating  local  initiatives  into  national  and  then  global-­‐scale  struggle  awaits  a  stronger  sense  of  CJ  strategies  to  prevent  cooptation  or  brute  repression.  But  since  the  heady  days  when  1980s-­‐era  IMF  Riots  gave  way  to  mass  social  movement  formations,  to  Zapatismo,  to  Brazil’s  Movement  of  Landless  Workers,  to  leftist  political  parties  and  to  other  manifestations  of  progress,  Latin  Americans  have  been  at  the  vanguard  of  the  world’s  civilizing  forces.  They  –  and  we  –  are  not  strong  enough  to  change  the  balance  of  forces  favouring  climate  injustice  next  month.  But  they  do  usually  signal  the  way  forward.  13  Fear  and  Loathing  of  Carbon  Market  Zombies:  A  Decade  and  Counting  of  Climate  Justice  Agitation  M.  K.  Dorsey,  Joint  Center  for  Political  &  Economic  Studies  SPECIAL  TO  IICAT  –  Lima,  Peru  –  December  2014  -­‐  COP20  As  early  as  2000  European  Union  watchdog  organizations  cautioned  against  utilizing  the  three  market  based  “solutions”  inaugurated  by  the  Kyoto  Protocol—emissions  trading,  joint  implementation  (JI)  and  the  Clean  Development  Mechanism  (CDM).  Referencing  the  troubles  of  carbon  offsetting,  enshrined  in  the  Clean  Development  Mechanism  more  than  a  decade  ago,  the  critics  further  admonished:  The  hypothesis  that  such  a  scheme  [as  the  clean  development  mechanism]  will  be  efficient  on  the  international  level  is  also  flawed.  One  must  not  forget  the  absolute  impossibility  of  monitoring  emissions  from  millions  of  sources  spread  all  over  the  world,  not  to  mention  the  lack  of  a  binding  regulatory  system  to  enforce  emissions  limits.6  Representatives  from  the  global  south  were  even  more  bearish,  to  couch  it  in  market  terms.  The  Delhi  based  Centre  for  Science  and  the  Environment  affirmed,  “The  rush  to  make  profits  out  of  carbon-­‐fixing  engenders  another  kind  of  colonialism.”  Perhaps  unsurprisingly,  an  emergent  late  20th  century  class  of  would-­‐be  scholar-­‐investors  6  Corporate  Europe  Observatory  (CEO).  (2000).  Greenhouse  market  mania:  UN  climate  talks  corrupted  by  corporate  pseudo-­‐solutions.  Amsterdam,  The  Netherlands.  preempted  the  critics  two  years  earlier,  opining  that  “implementation  of  activities  [like  offsetting]  aimed  to  mitigate  global  greenhouse  gas  emissions  is  more  cost-­‐  efficient  in  developing  countries  than  in  most  of  the  industrialized  world.”7  This  is  a  crucial  moment  for  the  planet  and  social  movements.  After  nearly  two  decades  of  persistent,  catastrophic  carbon  market  failures,  and  on  the  eve  of  the  2015  Paris  round  of  multilateral  climate  talks,  the  EU-­‐ETS  is  a  zombie  of  its  once  beleaguered  self.  The  zombie-­‐like  status  of  the  EU-­‐ETS  should  not  be  taken  lightly,  nor  as  hyperbole.  7  Dutschke,  M.  and  A.  Michaelowa.  (1998).  Creation  and  Sharing  of  Credits  through  the  Clean  Development  Mechanism  Underthe  Kyoto  Protocol.  HWWA  Discussion  Paper  62.  Institut  fürWirtschaftsforschung,  Hamburg.  The  rise  of  the  scholar-­‐investor  (or  scientist-­‐investor)  is  by  no  means  rare  in  the  scientific-­‐capitalist  driven  circuitries  of  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC).  “Scientists”  (although  not  officially  called  “scientist-­‐investors”  or  “scholar-­‐investors”)  are  given  special  access  as  an  officially  designated  “stakeholder”  class  at  UNFCCC  negotiations.  The  “scientist”  category,  let  alone  the  amalgam  of  “scientist-­‐investors”  or  “scholar-­‐investor”  is  an  under-­‐studyied  formation.  Some  (many?)  UNFCCC  registered  “scientists”  are  also  known  to  have  investment  or  capital  accumulation  stakes  in  myriad  aspects  of  the  UNFCCC  outcomes—including  the  Clean  Development  Mechanism  projects.  This  is  true  of  Michael  Dutschke  and  Axel  Michaelowa,  cited  above.  Prior  to  serving  as  an  IPCCC,  Working  Group  III  “Lead  author”  (which  subsequently  resulted  in  his  co-­‐receipt  of  the  Nobel  prize  with  other  IPCCC  lead  authors)  Dutschke  was  an  “Auditor”  forTUV-­‐SUD  one  of  the  three  largest  validator-­‐verifiers  of  Clean  Development  Mechanism  Projects.  Similarly  Michaelowa,  between  1997-­‐  2000,  served  on  the  advisory  board  of  the  World  Bank’s  AIJ-­‐  Programme—the  pilot  programme  for  CDM/JI  investments.  What  is  notably  missing  from  many  of  the  “scholarly”  contribution  of  these  authors  (and  others)  are  disclosures  of  their  affiliations,  especially  where  they  have  financial  interest  or  stand  to  gain  financially.  To  be  clear,  the  authors  herein,  do  not,  for  one  second  believe  in  the  empty  rants  or  claims  of  those  denying  the  existence  of  climate  change.  On  the  contrary  we  believe  climate  change  is  indeed  upon  us,  and  for  a  variety  of  scientific  reasons,  maybe  be  unfolding  in  ways  that  are  heretofore  unstoppable.  We  do  believe  that  “scientists”  with  investment  (or  professional)  interests  in  the  outcomes  must  disclose  such  ties.  14  Johannes  Teyssen,  chief  executive  of  Eon,  the  German  energy  group  that  is  one  of  Europe’s  largest,  firmly  told  an  EU  Commission-­‐  organized  meeting  of  carbon  market  stakeholders  in  Brussels:  “Let’s  talk  real.  The  ETS  is  bust,  it’s  dead.”  Teyssen  added,  “I  don't  know  a  single  person  in  the  world  that  would  invest  a  dime  based  on  the  ETS  [price]  signals.”8  Just  as  the  UN’s  clean  development  mechanism  (CDM)  announced  its  7000th  project  in  2013,  market  watchers  observed  a  new  problem,  the  rise  of  “zombie”  projects.  Speaking  to  Reuters  Stefan  Winter,  deputy  head  of  certification  at  the  CDM  auditing  company  Tuv  Nord  described  the  rise  of  “zombie”  carbon  projects,  or  those  in  which  the  company  is  “unable  to  contact  the  clients  by  phone  or  email.”  In  2013  TUV  counted  150  such  projects.  Alexandre  Kossoy,  a  senior  financial  specialist  within  the  World  Bank’s  Carbon  Finance  Unit,  told  Reuters  matter-­‐of-­‐  factly:  “It’s  not  surprising.  We  knew  about  it  but  …  we  haven’t  measured  how  many  because  it  would  take  months  to  go  project  by  project.”  No  wonder  then  that  a  thing  that  seems  to  carry  on  everyday  functions,  as  the  EU-­‐ETS  does,  but  is  simultaneously  considered  or  known  to  be  dead—or  at  least  staffed  by  unknown  and  unreachable  individuals—by  some  of  the  largest  investors  and  actors  in  the  EUETS  space,  seems  apt  for  zombie  classification.  8  See  “How  do  we  seize  opportunities  of  the  transition  to  a  low  carbonenergy  system,  while  avoiding  pitfalls  on  the  way?”  2012.  Presented  at  Energy  Roadmap  2050  Conference.  Speech  available  at:    Conference=14158.  Accessed  16  April  2012.  After  the  collapse  of  the  Durban  round  of  multilateral  climate  talks  the  Financial  Times  reported  in  February  2012,  “The  [EU-­‐ETS]  market  has  suffered  other  indignities  in  its  brief  history,  from  value  added  tax  frauds  worth  billions  of  euros  to  the  cybertheft  of  millions  of  permits  from  companies’  electronic  accounts.  But,  because  it  calls  into  question  the  fundamental  workings  of  the  market  itself,  the  price  slide  may  be  its  most  serious  affliction.”9  While  the  EU-­‐ETS  has  collapsed,  European  investors  seem  to  be  on  a  proverbial  hunt  for  later-­‐day-­‐investor  souls—both  in  Europe  and  abroad.  Perhaps  the  most  disturbing  example  of  the  hunt  for  living  by  proverbial  carbon  market  zombies  comes  from  finance  capital’s  efforts  across  Africa.  For  over  a  half  decade  the  Africa  Carbon  Forum,  in  particular,  has  been  the  go-­‐to-­‐place  where  cadres  of  predominantly  European  investors,  buttressed  by  multilateral  agencies,  actively  hunt  for  African  counterparts  to  invest  and  participate  in  a  space  that  some  of  the  very  same  investors  and  organizers  have  firmly  pronounced  dead.  As  the  UN  describes  it,  the  Africa  Carbon  Forum  seeks  “to  support  Africa’s  participation  in  global  carbon  markets  and  catalyze  green  investment  opportunities.”  These  are  the  crude,  perhaps  ruthless  political  economic  forces  of  multilateral  climate  policy  run  wild,  drawing  institutions,  civil  servants  and  even  civil  society  sympathizers  from  the  global  south  generally  and  Africa  in  particular  into  “dead”  markets—after  the  fact,  and  simultaneously  into  the  science-­‐investor-­‐economists’  upheld  myths  that  emissions  trading  can  appropriately  address  the  present  and  future  9  Chaffin,  Joshua.  2012.  “Emissions  trading:  Cheap  and  dirty.  Financial  Times  (UK):  13  February  2012.  15  crises  of  global  warming,  extreme  weather  events,  and  rising  socio-­‐economic  and  political  repression  from  North  to  South.  Alas,  zombie  markets  are  steeped  in  cultish  praise  or  official  multilateral  agency  endorsements—pending  your  vantage;  they  are  also  aggressively  resisted  by  civil  society  movements,  scrutinized  by  regulators  and  increasingly  simply  ignored  by  finance  capital,  media  and  growing  numbers  of  large  institutions.  After  Neoliberal  Necromancy  Proponents  of  the  establishment  of  global  carbon  markets  argue  such  markets  can  and  should  play  a  role  in  reducing  carbon  emissions  to  the  degree  necessary  to  stave  off  the  harmful  effects  those  emissions  are  having  on  the  global  climate  and  vulnerable  communities  across  the  globe.10  Complicating  matters  further,  global  carbon  market  proponents  also  expect  carbon  markets  to  be  key  instruments  capable  of  addressing  and  solving  complex  environmental  and  economic  problems-­‐-­‐simultaneously.11  In  effect  the  carbon  market  is  charged  (or  burdened)  with  the  dual  mission  of  assisting  developing  nations  to  establish  sustainable  economies  10  Aldy,  J.  E.  and  R.  N.  Stavins  (2007).  Architectures  for  agreement:  addressing  global  climate  change  in  the  post-­‐  Kyoto  world.  Cambridge;  New  York,  Cambridge  University  Press;  Figueres,  C.  (2000).  CDM:  Theory  and  Reality.  Carbon  Finance  Conference.  New  York,  NY,  Center  for  Sustainable  Development  in  the  Americas;  Tietenberg,  T.  H.  (2006).  Emissions  trading:  principles  and  practice.  Washington,  DC,  Resources  for  the  Future.  11  Giddens,  A.  (2009).  The  politics  of  climate  change.  Cambridge;  Malden,  MA,  Polity;  Yamin,  F.,  Ed.  (2005).  Climate  Change  and  Carbon  Markets:  A  Handbook  of  Emissions  Reduction  Mechanisms.  London,  UK,  Earthscan;  Ackerman,  F.  and  E.  A.  Stanton  (2010).  The  Social  Cost  of  Carbon.  Washington,  DC,  Economics  for  Equity  and  Environment;  Ackerman,  F.  (2009).  Can  we  afford  the  future?:  the  economics  of  a  warming  world.  London,  Zed  Books.  while  simultaneously  reducing  carbon  emissions  globally.  In  its  idealized  neoliberal  capitalist  form,  the  global  carbon  market  that  some  interlocutors  desire  exists  at  a  transcendental  level,  and  operates  without  workers  and  without  geographic  location.  Jos  Delbeke,  the  European  Commission,  Director  General  for  Climate  Action,  describes  the  role  of  the  state:  ‘Our  role  is  to  keep  the  regulatory  structure  as  simple  as  possible  and  let  the  market  play.’  Such  desires-­‐as-­‐edicts  ignore  the  realities  that  define  markets  at  various  local  to  global  scales.  Carbon  market  advocates  variously  seek  to  create  a  global  market  system  that  is  structured  to  privatize  investment  returns,  while  socializing  risks,  and  have  it  be  subject  to  minimal,  if  any,  governmental  regulation  of  labor,  finance,  and  trade.12  There  is,  however,  within  both  trading  schemes  and  offset  projects  a  significant  gap  between  the  desires  of  traders  and  what  is  currently  happening  with  regard  to  the  development  of  policies  to  reduce  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  University  of  Cambridge  economist  Michael  Grubb  observes:  Having  created  a  market-­‐based  mechanism  to  cut  carbon  a  lot  of  people  seem  to  expect  it  to  behave  in  a  non-­‐market  way  and  deliver  poverty  alleviation,  deliver  sustainable  development  co-­‐benefits.  But  fundamentally,  you  create  a  market,  it’s  12  Harvey,  D.  (1993).  "The  Nature  of  Environment:  The  Dialectics  of  Social  and  Environmental  Change."  The  Socialist  Register  29;  Harvey,  D.  (2005).  A  brief  history  of  neoliberalism.  New  York,  Oxford  University  Press;  Labatt,  S.  and  R.  R.  White  (2007).  Carbon  finance:  the  financial  implications  of  climate  change.  Hoboken,  N.J.,  John  Wiley  &  Sons;  Smith,  N.  (1991).  Uneven  development:  Nature,  capital,  and  the  production  of  space.  Oxford,  Uk,  B.  Blackwell;  McCarthy,  J.  and  S.  Prudham  (2004).  "Neoliberal  Nature  and  the  Nature  of  Neoliberalism."  Geoforum  35:  275-­‐  283.  16  behaving  the  way  markets  do,  it  chases  where  are  the  most  cost  effective  things,  where  can  they  make  the  most  profits  and  I  think  that  anyone  who  didn’t  expect  a  market  instrument  to  behave  in  that  way  didn’t  understand  what  they  were  doing.13  The  global  reality  is  that  the  emissions  market  and  its  investors  across  the  globe  are  finding  that  countries  are  developing  a  mismatch  of  policy  proposals  to  address  climate  change  and  (energy  consumption)  that  attempt  to  serve  their  national  interest  against  the  interest  of  global  investors.14  Some  of  those  local  solutions,  as  in  the  case  of  China,  may  not  be  ideal  for  those  who  wish  to  develop  a  global  carbon  market  and  its  investors.15  The  risk  level  is  tremendous  and  the  possibility  exists  that  financial  returns  are  held  to  a  minimum.  This  is  especially  strong  at  the  local  level  where  communities  are  resisting  national  reforms  imposed  by  government  elites  and  global  institutions  such  as  the  World  Bank.  Beyond  hegemonic  ideals,  proponents  of  a  global  carbon  market  have  turned  time  and  again  to  the  structure  and  (dys)function  of  the  EU-­‐ETS,  which  has  been  pedestalized  by  the  global  market  proponents,  inter  alia.  A  key  question  is:  How  does  one  move  beyond  the  abstract  discussion  about  markets,  specifically  the  EU-­‐ETS,  to  better  understand  market  (dys)function  in  a  political  economic  context?  Careful  examination  of  the  EU-­‐ETS  reveals  that  this  market  is  a  series  of  markets  operating  in  various  geographical  and  13  See:  .  14  Harvey,  D.  (2006).  Spaces  of  global  capitalism:  [towards  a  theory  of  uneven  geographical  development].  London,  Verso.  15  Allan,  A.  (2010)  UN  Turns  Up  Heat  on  Chinese  CDM.  Pointcarbon  News  economic  scales.  It  is  remarkably  small  and  is  controlled  by  a  small  number  of  players  with  little  competition  among  them  to  be  found.  A  very  small  number  of  market  actors  control  very  large  portions  of  overall  market  activity,  in  dollar  terms  and/or  in  terms  of  credit  allocation.  Over  a  decade  this  oligonomic  configuration  –a  universe  of  few  buyers  and  sellers  that  make  markets  amongst  themselves—  has  had  tremendously  deleterious  effects  on  overall  competition  in  the  market.  Moreover,  despite  an  expectation  that  the  market  would  be  organized  and  interconnected  with  the  actors  working  in  concert  to  assure  market  efficiencies,  the  EU-­‐ETS  actors  involved  tend  to  be  working  in  completely  different  spheres  and  scales,  with  some  projects  being  funded  through  private  financing,  some  being  funded  through  state  support  and  some  finding  their  financial  support  through  institutional  investors,  and  even  via  elaborate  market  schemes  to  consumers  in  “voluntary”  markets,  with  all  of  the  “market”  working  across  a  landscape  of  different  national  rules  and  uneven  and  differential  state  rules  (e.g.  China).  This  cacophony  of  carbon  market  investors,  wrapped  in  nested  oligonomies  with  little  to  no  regulatory  oversight,  is  crisis  prone,  liquidity  seeking  and  critically  not  serving  its  intended  mandates  of  “combat[ing]  climate  change”  and  “reducing  industrial  greenhouse  gas  emissions  cost-­‐effectively.”  In  the  present  configuration  carbon  markets  aid  and  abet  climate  catastrophe  and  help  fester  new,  unanticipated  ills.  Even  relatively  staid  organizations  like  the  International  Energy  Agency  (IEA)  have  argued  that  for  large  structural  changes  in  energy  production,  like  preventing  new  coal-­‐fired  power  stations  from  being  built,  Europe  needs  to  seek  options  beyond  its  carbon  market.  IEA  17  analysts  believe  the  EU-­‐ETS  cannot  facilitate  the  end  of  coal  within  a  decade.16  Resistance  is  Fertile  It  is  little  wonder  then  that  many  activists  and  observers  have  dubbed  the  whole  carbon  market  effort  a  “false  solution.”  Over  the  decade  arc  way  many  organizations  across  a  multitude  of  spaces  and  venues  have  arisen  to  articulate  civil  society  resistance  to  zombie  carbon  markets  on  the  grounds  that  markets  neither  reduce  emissions,  nor  deliver  climate  justice—but  indeed  exacerbate  injustice.  In  regional  contexts  like  California,  for  example,  communities  have  actively  resisted  the  creation  of  the  market  provisions  in  general  and  the  cap  and  trade  system  specifically  promulgated  by  the  California  Global  Warming  Solutions  Act  of  2006.  One  group,  aptly  named:  A.I.R  or  the  Association  of  Irritated  Residents,  filed  suit  against  the  California  Air  Resources  Board  (ARB).  While  A.I.R.  ultimately  lost,  the  San  Francisco  Superior  Court  did  issue  a  temporary  injunction  preventing  the  ARB  from  conducting  any  further  work  on  its  cap-­‐and-­‐  trade  program.  2014  marked  the  10th  anniversary  of  the  Durban  Group  for  Climate  Justice  –“an  international  network  of  independent  organizations,  individuals  and  people's  movements  who  reject  the  approach  to  climate  change  promoted  by  polluting  corporations,  financiers,  northern  governments  and  economists.”  Since  its  2004  inception  the  Durban  Group  has  been  a  16  Carr,  M.  and  S.  Bakewell.  2013.  “EU  Should  Move  Beyond  Carbon  Market  to  Shut  Coal,  IEA  Says.”  Bloomberg  (  move-­‐beyond-­‐carbon-­‐market-­‐to-­‐shut-­‐coal-­‐power-­‐iea-­‐  says.html).  “platform  for  discussion  and  analysis  of  climate  justice,”  and  they  “engage  in  regular  advocacy  in  favour  of  real  not  false  solutions  to  the  crisis.”  This  past  September,  more  than  400,000  individuals  largely  tied  and  drawn  together  by  North  American  environmental  social  movement  organizations  came  together  in  New  York—while  they  did  not  explicitly  target  false  solutions  from  markets,  the  gathering  underscored  the  critical  role  citizens  and  social  movements  can  and  do  play  to  bring  about  forward  thinking  climate  policies  that  demand  aggressive  state  action,  in  lieu  of  market  malaise,  ultimately  delivering  climate  justice.  As  I’ve  argued  elsewhere:  “The  demands  for  climate  justice  are  thus  a  subset  of  a  wider  set  of  discussions  and  demands  for  environmental  justice.  These  demands  are  not  just  positions  against  authority,  anti-­‐  positions  ‘‘against  power,’’  per  se.  To  the  contrary,  the  demand  for  climate  justice  is  an  expression  of  hope—indeed,  desire  and  love—and  a  demand  for  objectives  rooted  in  collective  decision-­‐making  that  are  well  beyond  the  provisional  scope  of  power  as  presently  conceived.  The  climate  justice  movement  is  therefore  one  of  liberation  as  well  as  economic  and  ideological  sovereignty.  Prophetically,  the  struggle  for  climate  justice  dares  to  demand  changing  the  world  without  reproducing  hierarchical  state  or  market  power  as  it  is  currently  known.  In  this  way,  it  holds  both  a  threat  against  hegemonic  doxa  and  a  novel  promise  of  liberation.”17  17  See:  Dorsey,  M.  2007.  Climate  Knowledge  and  Power:  Tales  of  Skeptic  Tanks,  Weather  Gods,  and  Sagas  for  Climate  (In)justice.  Capitalism,  Nature,  Socialism  18(2),  p.  20.  18  What  Now  for  Climate  Justice?  Re-­‐Imagining  Radical  Climate  Justice  John  Foran  Note  to  readers:  if  you  want  to  skip  the  discussion  of  the  climate  crisis  itself,  feel  free  to  leap  ahead  in  this  essay  to  the  point  where  you  want  to  start!  Introduction  The  science  is  in:  climate  change  is  here  now,  not  in  the  future,18  and  it  is  already  having  devastating  effects  on  people’s  lives.19  That’s  the  bad  news.  Even  worse,  the  massive  social,  economic,  and  political  inequalities  already  generated  by  neoliberal  capitalism  would  seem  to  set  the  social  and  natural  worlds  on  a  collision  course  which  global  elites  cannot  win  even  on  their  own  terms  without  destroying  the  basis  for  all  human  life.  To  put  it  bluntly,  the  climate  crisis  is  perilous,  our  500  year-­‐old  economic  system  cannot  see  us  through  it  safely,  the  window  for  resolving  this  dilemma  is  closing,  and  the  forces  arrayed  against  us  are  strong,  very  strong.  My  thanks  to  Corrie  Ellis  and  Richard  Widick  for  helpful  comments  on  earlier  drafts  of  this  paper.  18  IPCC  [Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change],  “Summary  for  Policymakers,”  pp.  1-­‐28  in  Climate  Change  2013:  The  Physical  Science  Basis.  Contribution  of  Working  Group  I  to  the  Fifth  Assessment  Report  of  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change,  edited  by  T.F.  Stocker,  D.  Qin,  G.-­‐K.  Plattner,  M.  Tignor,  S.K.  Allen,  J.  Boschung,  A.  Nauels,  Y.  Xia,  V.  Bex,  and  P.M.  Midgley  (Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press,  2013),    _SPM_FINAL.  /report/WG1AR5_SPM_FINAL.pdf  19  IPCC,  “Summary  for  Policymakers,”  pp.  1-­‐44  in  Climate  Change  2014:  Impacts,  Adaptation,  and  Vulnerability,  Contribution  of  Working  Group  II  to  the  Fifth  Assessment  Report  of  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change,  edited  by  Christopher  B.  Field  et  al.  (Cambridge:  Cambridge  University  Press,  2014),      d.pdf  The  good  news  is  that  there’s  a  global  climate  justice  movement  which  is  growing  in  numbers,  reach,  strength,  and  inventiveness.  This  movement  is  impossible  to  encompass  easily,  because  it  consists  of  literally  thousands  of  organizations  at  every  scale  –  community,  city,  bio/region,  nation,  and  global  –  interlinked  in  a  vast  network  of  networks.20  This  essay  will  trace  some  of  its  activities,  asking  where  the  major  points  of  impact  lie  at  the  moment,  and  what  strategic  decisions  must  be  faced  moving  forward.  The  global  climate  justice  movement  is  growing  steadily,  but  it  is  still  far  too  weak  to  win  –  at  least  for  the  moment.  Yet  without  such  a  movement,  we  are  literally  cooked.  Climate  justice  forces  knows  this,  and  stopping  the  elites  from  destroying  humanity’s  future  prospects  is  their  agenda.  It  should  also  be  the  agenda  of  every  activist  and  concerned  citizen  on  the  planet.  The  twelve  months  between  the  December  2014  Lima  COP  20,  and  the  fateful  COP  21  in  Paris  at  the  end  of  2015  must  be  the  year  that  we  scale  up  our  efforts  toward  the  end  of  mounting  irresistible  pressure  of  all  kinds  on  our  governments  and  on  the  corporations,  banks,  and  all  the  other  institutions  of  neoliberal  capitalism  that  they  serve,  forcing  them  to  take  the  decisive  steps  we  all  need  and  want,  such  as  adoption  of  a  fair  and  binding  global  climate  treaty  that  will  set  a  course  for  sustainable  post-­‐capitalist  societies  free  of  structured  violence  and  run  democratically  by  the  ninety-­‐nine  percent.  20  Paul  Hawken  makes  the  claim  that  the  movement  organizations  number  in  the  thousands:  Blessed  Unrest:  How  the  Largest  Movement  in  the  World  Came  into  Being  and  Why  No  One  Saw  It  Coming  (New  York:  Viking,  2007).  For  a  partial,  annotated  list  of  some  of  the  key  climate  justice  movements  and  resources  of  which  I  am  aware,  see  “The  Global  Justice  Movement  On-­‐line”  at    19  To  achieve  these  ends,  we  will  need  to  assemble  the  greatest  social  movement  the  world  has  ever.  An  Earth  in  Crisis  The  present  moment  and  the  foreseeable  future  are  defined  by  a  triple  crisis,  consisting  of  n economic  precariousness  and  increasingly  unequal  access  to  well-­‐being  (el  buen  vivir21)  in  the  age  of  neoliberal  capitalist  globalization  and  profound  economic  crisis;  n despite  this,  and  indeed  because  of  it,  there  has  been  a  corresponding  waning  of  public  confidence  in  political  institutions  (the  “democratic  deficit”);  n and  cultures  where  endemic  violence  is  embedded  in  everyday  life,  from  sexual  assault  to  militarism  and  global  warfare.  These  are  now  bound  together  and  exacerbated  by  the  worst  crisis  of  all,  the  wild  card  of  climate  chaos.  And  all  of  this  would  seem  to  auger  a  perfect  storm  of  crisis.22  21  Buen  vivir  (literally,  “living  well”),  in  its  largest  sense  means  living  in  harmony  with  other  people  and  nature,  and  is  often  contrasted  with  the  neoliberal  notion  of  consuming  more  to  live  better.  This  Quechua  and  Aymara  indigenous  concept  has  been  inscribed  in  the  Ecuadoran  constitution.  22  Even  the  climate  science  community  is  starting  to  realize  that  the  natural  sciences  cannot  by  themselves  tell  us  how  to  reduce  emissions.  That  this  is  an  eminently  political  and  economic  issue  is  suggested  by  the  observation  that  “The  scenarios  presented  here  underscore  the  perils  of  global  pathways  that  enable  diverse  stressors  –  cultural  polarization,  geopolitical  fissures,  environmental  degradation,  persistent  poverty,  and  economic  instability  –  to  reinforce  and  amplify  each  other”:  Paul  D.  Raskin,  “Global  Scenarios:  Background  Review  for  the  Millennium  Ecosystem  Assessment.”  Ecosystems  8  (2005):  133–42,  ,  page  141,  cited  by  in  Fiacha  O’Dowda,  “Future  in  the  Anthropocene:  An  Inquiry  into  Relationships  between  Climate  and  Society  in  Global  Future  This  triple  crisis  makes  climate  change  a  “wicked”  problem,  defined  as  one  that  is  difficult  or  impossible  to  solve  because  of  incomplete,  contradictory,  and  changing  requirements  that  are  often  difficult  to  recognize.  The  term  “wicked”  is  used  to  denote  resistance  to  resolution,  rather  than  evil.  Moreover,  because  of  complex  interdependencies,  the  effort  to  solve  one  aspect  of  a  wicked  problem  may  reveal  or  create  other  problems….  Classic  examples  of  wicked  problems  include  economic,  environmental,  and  political  issues.  A  problem  whose  solution  requires  a  great  number  of  people  to  change  their  mindsets  and  behavior  is  likely  to  be  a  wicked  problem.23  For  Kelly  Levin  and  her  colleagues,  most  social  problems  are  wicked  in  the  above  sense.  Climate  change,  on  the  other  hand,  is  a  super  wicked  problem,  characterized  by  four  features:  1)  time  is  running  out,  2)  those  seeking  to  end  the  problem  (humans,  and  more  precisely,  global  elites)  are  also  causing  it,  3)  it  is  a  global  collective  action  problem  overseen  by  at  best  a  weak  central  authority  (as  anyone  who  has  ever  witnessed  a  U.N.  Scenarios  and  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  in  Climate  Change,”  M.A.  thesis,  Erasmus  Mundus  (August  2014),  16.  O’Dowda’s  thesis  breaks  new  ground  in  our  understanding  of  the  limitations  of  the  IPCC’s  efforts  to  bring  a  social  scientific  perspective  into  its  modeling.  To  be  sure,  future  scenarios  are  meaningless  without  taking  into  account  their  economic,  political,  social,  and  cultural  dimensions;  the  question  is  how  best  to  do  so.  23  The  Australian  Public  Service  Commission,  “Tackling  Wicked  Problems:  A  Public  Policy  Perspective”  (October  25,  2007).  The  term  apparently  originated  in  social  planning,  and  was  first  introduced  by  Horst  Rittel  and  Melvin  Webber  in  their  1973  article  “Dilemmas  in  a  General  Theory  of  Planning,”  Policy  Sciences  4:  155–169.  20  climate  summit  can  attest).  This  leads  to  the  fourth  obstacle:  Partly  as  a  result  of  the  above  three  features,  super  wicked  problems  generate  a  situation  in  which  the  public  and  decision  makers,  even  in  the  face  of  overwhelming  evidence  of  the  risks  of  significant  or  even  catastrophic  impacts  from  inaction,  make  decisions  that  disregard  this  information  and  reflect  very  short  time  horizons.  It  is  this  very  feature  that  has  frustrated  so  many  climate  policy  advocates.  This  phenomenon  is  analogous  to  smokers  who,  while  they  know  the  high  probability  of  significant  health  problems  and  even  death,  make  a  decision  to  smoke  based  on  immediate  gratification.  This  characteristic  is  especially  pernicious  because  although  it  is  known  that  negative  effects  will  occur  (such  as  respiration  challenges  for  the  smoker)  and  that  there  is  a  high  risk  of  catastrophic  events  (such  as  a  heart  attack  or  lung  cancer),  the  precise  consequences  are  never  certain  for  any  one  individual.24  The  interdependency  of  the  several  crises  besetting  us  is  significant;  it  means  that  holism  is  needed  in  confronting  the  climate  crisis,  and  that  the  many  intersecting  struggles  that  call  for  justice  must  somehow  be  approached  together.  The  upside  of  dealing  with  such  a  complex  crisis  is  that  making  progress  in  any  sphere  of  it  can  24  Kelly  Levin,  Benjamin  Cashore,  Steven  Bernstein  and  Graeme  Auld,  “Overcoming  the  Tragedy  of  Super  Wicked  Problems:  Constraining  our  Future  Selves  to  Ameliorate  Global  Climate  Change,”  Policy  Sciences  45  (2)  (June  2012):  123-­‐152.  change  the  equation  for  the  better  in  others,  and  that  synergies  among  movements  can  emerge  when  they  form  strong  alliances.  In  December  2015,  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  [UNFCCC]  convenes  the  COP  21  meetings  (the  Conference  of  the  Parties,  in  this  case  the  twenty-­‐first  annual  U.N.  climate  summit)  in  Paris  to  finalize  the  global  climate  treaty  it  has  been  working  on  for  several  years.  The  goal  is  to  find  ways  to  prevent  earth  from  warming  more  than  two  degrees  Celsius  since  1800.  This  target  was  set  by  climate  scientists  more  than  a  decade  ago  and  agreed  by  the  governments  of  the  world  at  COP  15  in  Copenhagen  in  2009  to  be  a  threshold  which  must  be  respected:  passing  it  will  likely  plunge  humanity  into  increasingly  unlivable  conditions  (it  is  now  increasingly  realized  that  the  even  more  difficult  target  of  1.5  degrees  Celsius  should  be  the  Rubicon  that  must  not  be  passed).25  The  treaty  under  negotiation  may  therefore  represent  one  of  the  last  best  chances  to  contain  the  disruptive  climate  change  that  is  coming  our  way  and  to  preserve  some  dignity  for  individuals  and  societies.  Every  year  that  passes  without  action  closes  the  vise  more  tightly  on  efforts  to  avert  these  scenarios.  But  for  years  now  at  the  COP,  a  protracted  stalemate  has  been  playing  out,  aptly  characterized  by  the  subtitle  of  a  book  by  activist  scholar  Patrick  Bond,  published  when  COP  17  came  to  his  home  town  of  Durban  in  25  The  gravity  of  the  situation  is  well  sketched  out  in  Kevin  Anderson  “Climate  Change  Going  Beyond  Dangerous  –  Brutal  Numbers  and  Tenuous  Hope,”  What  Next?  Climate,  Development  and  Equity,  edited  by  Niclas  Hällström,  special  issue  of  Development  Dialogue  61  (September  2012):  16-­‐40,    III/Single-­‐articles/wnv3_andersson_144.pdf  21  2011:  “Paralysis  Above.”26  Meanwhile,  the  power  of  the  corporations,  banks,  and  free  market-­‐oriented  private  sector  in  general,  so  evident  at  the  November  2013  COP  19  in  Warsaw,  has  become  that  much  greater.27  The  stubborn  conflict  between  the  interests  of  the  global  North  and  global  South  –  with  economic  powerhouses  China,  India,  and  Brazil  now  lodged  in  between  –  remains  as  intractable  as  ever  in  an  irreconcilable  stand-­‐  off  that  makes  the  chances  of  finding  pathways  to  a  less  than  2  degrees  Celsius  world  look  vanishingly  small.  Humanity’s  future,  then,  looks  increasingly  set  to  be  a  race.  In  lane  one  stand  the  corporations  and  nation  state  driving  climate  change  and  its  effects  to  the  limit.  In  lane  two  stand  the  climate  justice  movement  and  its  nation-­‐state  and  popular  allies  who  seek  to  check  those  effects,  halt  the  rate  of  increase  in  greenhouse  gas  emissions  that  cause  global  warming,  and  then  rapidly  reverse  the  trend  downward.  They  try  to  do  this  through  a  variety  of  means:  defeating  the  economic  and  political  one  percent  at  the  ballot  box,  in  the  streets,  at  places  of  work  and  consumption,  and  in  the  very  carbon-­‐  saturated  culture  and  media  in  which  we  live,  work,  and  dream.  Two  Observations  I’d  like  to  make  two  observations,  which  are  not  self-­‐evident  and  which  may  challenge  9  Patrick  Bond,  Politics  of  Climate  Justice:  Paralysis  Above,  Movement  Below  (Durban:  University  of  KwaZulu  Natal  Press,  2012).  27  See  the  “Open  letter  calling  for  rules  to  protect  the  integrity  of  climate  policy-­‐making  from  vested  corporate  interests”  (November  21,  2013)  signed  by  dozens  of  climate  organizations  at  the  Warsaw  COP  19:    protect-­‐integrity-­‐climate-­‐policy-­‐making-­‐vested-­‐corporate-­‐  interests.  some  readers’  assumptions  and  understandings:  1)  the  climate  crisis  is  far  more  profound  and  daunting  than  most  of  us  realize;  and  2)  the  planet  cannot  stay  below  the  bottom-­‐line  warming  target  of  2  degrees  (let  alone  1.5  degrees)  Celsius  under  capitalism  as  we  know  it.  Let’s  take  a  brief  look  at  each  of  these  claims.  The  climate  crisis  is  far  more  profound  and  daunting  than  most  of  us  realize  We  are  surrounded  by  bad  climate  news,  whether  it’s  extreme  weather  events  of  all  kinds  or  the  latest  scientific  reports.  Given  this,  one  suspects  that  things  are  worse  than  even  those  of  us  who  follow  all  of  this  know.  Indeed  the  global  scientific  community  and  the  UNFCCC  itself  have  an  inkling  of  this:  “[T]hese  days,  it  is  what  we  don’t  know  that  is  the  most  worrying  –  because  you  can’t  properly  prepare  for  what  you  can’t  foresee.”28  In  his  powerful  essay,  “Global  Warming’s  Terrifying  New  Math,”  prominent  U.S.  climate  activist  Bill  McKibben  argues  that  to  have  a  reasonable  chance  to  stay  under  a  two-­‐  degrees  Celsius  temperature  rise  in  this  century,  we  can  only  burn  a  given  amount  of  fossil  fuels  (as  he  points  out,  in  this  case,  “reasonable”  means  four  chances  in  five,  or  “somewhat  worse  odds  than  playing  Russian  roulette  with  a  six-­‐shooter”).  The  science  tells  us  that  this  means  the  world’s  largest  fossil-­‐fuel  producing  corporations  and  countries  must  be  compelled  to  leave  80  percent  of  their  proven  reserves  (and  thus  their  actual  value)  in  the  ground.  This  is  the  28  This  quote  is  found  in  O’Dowda,  “Future  in  the  Anthropocene,”  12-­‐13,  citing  “The  Science,”  accessed  July  20,  2014,    6064.php  22  inescapable  physical  logic  of  salvaging  a  livable  planet  for  future  generations.29  In  2012,  at  the  time  of  writing,  McKibben  estimated  the  cap  for  maximum  atmospheric  CO2  emissions  at  565  gigatons  as  the  upper  limit  for  staying  at  or  below  a  2  degrees  Celsius  temperature  rise.  With  annual  global  emissions  currently  running  around  34  gigatons  a  year,  and  rising  about  three  percent  per  annum,  this  cap  is  roughly  equal  to  a  fourteen-­‐year  supply  –  till  about  2026  –  if  “business  as  usual”  trends  of  economic  production  and  growth  continue.30  The  terrifying  part,  of  course,  is  that  the  estimate  that  the  world’s  already  proven  reserves  of  fossil  fuels  exceeds  McKibben’s  cap  by  five  times.  In  other  words,  the  richest  corporations  in  the  history  of  the  world  would  have  to  forego  four-­‐fifths  of  their  future  earnings  –  by  some  estimates,  an  astronomical  $20  trillion.31  But  instead,  they  are  currently  spending  over  $600  billion  a  year  trying  to  discover  new  sources  of  fossil  fuels  –  fracking,  tar  sands,  deep-­‐water  drilling,  Arctic  oil,  mountain-­‐top  removal  –  while  each  year  the  amount  we  can  afford  to  burn  decreases.  Radical  climate  scientists  Kevin  Anderson  and  Alice  Bows  of  the  Tyndall  Centre  for  Climate  Change  Research  in  Manchester,  England,  are  29  Bill  McKibben,  “Global  Warming’s  Terrifying  New  Math:  Three  simple  numbers  that  add  up  to  global  catastrophe  -­‐  and  that  make  clear  who  the  real  enemy  is,  “Rolling  Stone  (July  19,  2012),    warmings-­‐terrifying-­‐new-­‐math-­‐20120719  30  My  thanks  to  Eknath  and  Chetan  Ghate,  who  calculated  the  13.68  year  supply  (starting  with  2012).  The  formula  is  565  =  (t=1  to  t=x)  {34*(1.03)}^t  where  x  is  the  number  of  years  that  it  takes  for  the  right  hand  side  to  reach  565.  31  “John  Fullerton,  a  former  managing  director  at  JP  Morgan  who  now  runs  the  Capital  Institute,  calculates  that  at  today’s  market  value,  those  2,795  gigatons  of  carbon  emissions  are  worth  about  $27  trillion”:  McKibben,  “Global  Warming’s  Terrifying  New  Math.”  doing  what  more  scientists  need  to  do:  like  McKibben,  they  are  not  only  analyzing  the  climate  problem,  but  are  mobilizing  their  knowledge  to  identify  the  larger  political  problem  that  underlies  it.32  Anderson  and  Bows  communicated  this  mission  in  the  subtitle  to  their  well-­‐attended  side  event  running  parallel  to  last  November’s  COP  19  UN  climate  summit  in  Warsaw,  Poland:  “Global  Carbon  Budget  2013:  Rising  emissions  and  a  radical  plan  for  2  degrees.”33  The  event  included  a  sobering  presentation  of  numbers,  only  slightly  different  from  McKibben’s,  which  would  allow  us  to  emit  another  1,000  gigatons  of  CO2  for  a  66  percent  chance  of  staying  under  two  degrees.  According  to  these  assumptions,  we  have  roughly  twenty  years  left  of  business  as  usual  before  we  exceed  the  limit  (but  now  put  two  bullets  in  the  gun  while  playing  Russian  roulette  with  the  planet).  What  makes  Anderson  and  Bows  true  heroes  within  the  climate  science  community,  however,  is  their  bold  articulation  of  the  policy  implications  of  our  predicament.  They  argue  that  we  need  to  avoid  4  degrees  at  all  cost  (as  even  the  World  Bank  now  agrees),34  and  that  the  global  North  needs  to  cut  70  percent  of  its  emissions  over  the  next  decade.  As  they  noted,  “we’re  not  short  of  capital,  just  the  initiative  and  courage.”  More  32  Anderson  “Climate  Change  Going  Beyond  Dangerous  –  Brutal  Numbers  and  Tenuous  Hope.”  33  This  account  is  from  my  field  notes;  on  what  the  Warsaw  COP  means  for  the  global  climate  justice  movement  see  John  Foran,  “‘¡Volveremos!/We  Will  Return’:  The  State  of  Play  for  the  Global  Climate  Justice  Movement  at  the  2013  Warsaw  UN  Climate  Summit  COP  19,”  Interface:  A  Journal  for  and  about  Social  Movements  6  (1)  (May  2014).  34  World  Bank,  Turn  Down  the  Heat:  Why  a  4°  World  Must  Be  Avoided.  A  Report  for  the  World  Bank  by  the  Potsdam  Institute  for  Climate  Impact  Research  and  Climate  Analytics  (November  2012),    _Down_the_heat_Why_a_4_degree_centrigrade_warmer_w  orld_must_be_avoided.pdf  23  damning  are  the  political  consequences  that  Anderson  drew  just  before  the  COP  19  talks:  “Today,  after  two  decades  of  bluff  and  lies,  the  remaining  2  degrees  Celsius  budget  demands  revolutionary  change  to  the  political  and  economic  hegemony.”35  In  an  interview  during  the  talks,  Anderson  said:  “I’m  really  stunned  there  is  no  sense  of  urgency  here,”  pointing  out  that  leadership,  courage,  innovative  thinking,  engaged  people,  and  difficult  choices  are  ultimately  needed  to  appropriately  deal  with  climate  change.36  Following  from  this,  the  question  the  global  climate  justice  movement  confronts  is:  What  are  the  corresponding  social  and  political  implications  of  McKibben’s  argument?  In  other  words,  just  how  do  we  keep  warming  in  the  1.5-­‐2  degree  range,  with  the  might  of  the  world’s  largest  corporations  and  richest  governments  united  in  suicidal  lockstep  against  us?  The  planet  cannot  stay  below  2  degrees  Celsius  under  capitalism  as  we  know  it  Here  we  come  to  the  economic  bedrock  of  the  current  situation  named  by  Naomi  Klein  in  the  title  of  her  important  new  book:  This  Changes  Everything:  Capitalism  vs.  the  Climate.37  Neoliberal  capitalism  is  undergoing  multiple  crises,  mostly  the  effects  35  Renfrey  Clarke,  “The  New  Revolutionaries:  Climate  Scientists  Demand  Radical  Change”  (January  9,  2014),    scientists-­‐become-­‐revolutionaries/  36  Anderson  is  quoted  in  Stephen  Leahy,  “South  Scores  11th-­‐  Hour  Win  on  Climate  Loss  and  Damage”(November  2013),    climate-­‐loss-­‐and-­‐damage/  37  Naomi  Klein,  This  Changes  Everything:  Capitalism  vs.  the  Climate  (New  York:  Simon  and  Schuster,  2014).  A  pdf  of  the  book  can  be  found  here.  I  have  reviewed  it  here:  “Reflections  on  Naomi  Klein’s  ‘This  Changes  Everything’”  (November  30,  2014),    naomi-­‐kleins-­‐changes-­‐everything/  of  its  “normal”  operations.  In  the  last  twenty  years,  the  rampant  privatization  of  public  goods  and  services  have  generated  obscene  inequality  and  unparalleled  concentrations  of  wealth  and  power:  while  just  90  corporations  and  fossil-­‐fuel  exporting  countries  are  responsible  for  fully  two-­‐thirds  of  all  the  carbon  emissions  discharged  since  the  dawn  of  the  industrial  revolution,  so  the  richest  85  individuals  in  the  world  now  possess  as  much  wealth  as  the  poorest  half  of  humanity  –  3.5  billion  people.38  To  this  we  may  add  what  Rob  Nixon  refers  to  as  the  “slow  violence”  of  resource  depletion  and  the  violence  and  militarism  that  accompany  the  attempt  of  the  United  States  to  secure  its  primacy  in  the  world  system  by  massive  spending  to  fight  wars  and  maintain  military  bases  that  give  it  the  capacity  to  do  so  all  over  the  world.  Combined,  and  with  climate  change  now  in  the  ascendant,  these  look  like  the  ultimate,  irresolvable  (whether  on  capitalism’s  terms,  or  in  terms  of  a  livable  future)  final  contradictions  of  capitalism.  Because  its  economic  logic  is  based  on  literally  endless  growth,  which  requires  ever-­‐  rising  demands  on  the  planet’s  finite  natural  resources,  capitalism  will  become  unviable  as  resources  are  increasingly  depleted,  overworked,  or  made  scarce  by  the  impacts  of  climate  change.  The  problem  in  the  38  Graeme  Wearden,  “Oxfam:  85  richest  people  as  wealthy  as  poorest  half  of  the  world,”  The  Guardian  (January  20,  2014),    85-­‐richest-­‐people-­‐half-­‐of-­‐the-­‐world;  the  original  study  is  by  Oxfam  2014.  In  1999,  the  United  Nations  Development  Program  reported  “The  net  worth  of  the  world’s  200  richest  people  increased  from  $440  billion  to  more  than  $1  trillion  in  just  the  four  years  from  1994  to  1998.  The  assets  of  the  three  richest  people  were  more  than  the  combined  GNP  of  the  48  least  developed  countries”:  UNDP  Human  Development  Report:  Globalization  with  a  Human  Face  (New  York:  UNDP,  1999),  36-­‐37,  quoted  in  Vijay  Prasad,  The  Poorer  Nations:  A  Possible  History  of  the  Global  South  (London:  Verso,  2014),  234.  24  medium-­‐term  future  of  capitalism  (e.g.  the  next  25-­‐50  years)  is  that  the  natural  resource  base  necessary  for  producing  what  humans  require  to  survive  will  no  longer  be  dependable.  While  some  excellent  advocates  of  sustainable  development,  notably  British  ecological  economist  and  University  of  Surrey  professor  Tim  Jackson,39  have  advanced  the  important  idea  that  an  ecologically-­‐guided  “degrowth”  economy  is  a  solution  to  this  contradiction,  what’s  missing  is  a  convincing  case  that  this  could  be  delivered  under  the  political  economy  of  capitalism  as  we  know  it.  Naomi  Klein  puts  it  this  way:  The  bottom  line  is  what  matters  here:  our  economic  system  and  our  planetary  system  are  now  at  war.  Or,  more  accurately,  our  economy  is  at  war  with  many  forms  of  life  on  earth,  including  human  life.  What  the  climate  needs  in  order  to  avoid  collapse  is  a  contraction  in  humanity’s  use  of  resources;  what  our  economic  model  demands  to  avoid  collapse  is  unfettered  expansion.  Only  one  of  these  sets  of  rules  can  be  changed,  and  it’s  not  the  laws  of  nature.40  Nor  does  it  appear  realistic  that  capitalism  can  be  radically  reformed,  even  with  all  the  political  will  in  the  world  (currently  conspicuous  by  its  absence)  in  the  necessary  time  frame  (by  2050),  by  which  point  climate  science  tells  us  the  vast  majority  of  emissions  must  have  ended.  Australian  journalist  Renfrey  Clarke  asks  a  most  pertinent  question:  “What  is  it  about  39  Tim  Jackson,  Prosperity  without  Growth:  Economics  for  a  Finite  Planet  (Oxford:  Earthscan,  2011),    40  Klein,  This  Changes  Everything,  21.  capitalism  that  the  system  willfully  pursues  strategies  that  look  certain  to  bring  about  its  own  demise?”  The  answer  lies  in  the  fact  that  while  an  unaddressed  climate  crisis  will  be  lethal  to  capitalism,  the  solutions  to  the  crisis  also  promise  to  bring  the  system  down  –  and  sooner.  The  capitalists’  dilemma  becomes  clearer  if  we  list  some  of  the  key  measures  required….:  –  Material  and  financial  resources  need  to  be  reoriented,  in  a  concerted  way,  from  the  pursuit  of  maximum  profit  toward  achieving  rapid  declines  in  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  –  This  reorientation  of  the  economy  will  need  to  include  a  large  element  of  direct  state  spending,  structured  around  long-­‐term  planning  and  backed  by  tightening  regulation.  Schemes  such  as  carbon  pricing  cannot  play  more  than  a  limited,  subsidiary  role.  –  To  keep  mass  living  standards  at  the  highest  levels  consistent  with  these  measures,  and  ensure  popular  support,  the  main  costs  of  the  reorientation  need  to  be  levied  on  the  wealthy.41  He  concludes  “Can  anyone  imagine  the  world’s  capitalist  elites  agreeing  to  such  measures,  except  perhaps  under  the  most  extreme  popular  pressure?”  and  closes  by  quoting  Noam  Chomsky:  “In  the  moral  41  Renfrey  Clarke,  “Climate  Change:  Evidence  of  the  Death-­‐  wish  of  Capitalism”  (April  26,  2014),    25  calculus  of  capitalism,  greater  profits  in  the  next  quarter  outweigh  the  fate  of  your  grandchildren.”42  Of  course,  both  the  depth  of  the  current  crisis,  and  the  central  role  played  by  the  climate  disruption  that  exacerbates  it,  suggest  that  our  activism  around  climate  change  may  be  one  of  the  keys  to  moving  beyond  capitalism  in  our  lifetime.  It  seems  increasingly  evident  that  only  a  strong  and  vigorous  climate  justice  movement  on  a  global  scale  has  the  capacity  to  force  governments  to  stand  up  to  the  economic  and  political  forces  of  carbon  capitalism  to  agree  to  the  treaty  and  take  the  other  actions  needed  to  keep  the  planet  under  the  dangerous  threshold  of  2  degrees  Celsius.  The  Trajectory  of  the  Global  Climate  Justice  Movement  Let’s  consider  the  historical  arc  of  this  movement  so  far.  One  dividing  line  straddles  the  end  of  2009,  when  the  COP  15  climate  summit  met  in  Copenhagen  amidst  great  public  fanfare  and  media  attention  in  anticipation  of  a  deal  on  climate.  The  global  climate  justice  movement  had  announced  its  existence  two  years  before,  at  the  COP  13  meeting  in  Bali  in  2007,  when  the  radical  network  Climate  Justice  Now!  formed,  and  attracted  to  it  some  formidable  forces.  These  included  the  international  peasant  movement  Via  Campesina,  the  youthful  young  climate  justice  radicals  who  started  Camp  for  Climate  Action  in  the  U.K.,  Jubilee  South  and  the  intellectuals  around  Third  World  Network  and  Focus  on  the  Global  South,  Friends  of  the  42  Javier  Sethness,  “Noam  Chomsky:  Ecology,  Ethics,  Anarchism,”  Truthout  (April  3,  2014),      anarchism  Earth  International  [FOEI],  the  Durban  Group  for  Climate  Justice,  and  many  others  perhaps  just  outside  it,  among  them  the  indispensable  Bill  McKibben  and  a  rising  350.org.  In  Copenhagen,  climate  justice  advocates  and  activists  had  support  inside  the  negotiation  halls,  as  well  as  outside  on  the  streets,  where  100,000  people  marched  for  the  planet.  Their  allies  included  Mohamed  Nasheed  of  the  Maldives  and  much  of  the  40-­‐plus  member  strong  Alliance  of  Small  Island  States  (AOSIS);  Bolivian  president  Evo  Morales,  Venezuela’s  Hugo  Chávez  and  the  ALBA  (Bolivarian  Alliance)  left-­‐of-­‐center  countries  of  Latin  America’s  Pink  Tide;  and  a  less  radical  but  important  part  of  the  Global  North,  most  notably  the  European  Union,  led  by  Gordon  Brown  in  the  UK,  Germany,  and  some  of  the  Scandinavian  governments.  When  the  United  States  and  China,  the  world’s  two  biggest  emitters  of  greenhouse  gases,  failed  to  find  any  common  ground,  the  talks  collapsed.  In  reality,  neither  they  nor  any  of  the  other  large  emitting  countries  were  willing  to  significantly  curb  the  burning  of  fossil  fuels  on  which  their  economies  ran.  With  the  economic  collapse  that  triggered  the  Great  Recession  in  the  same  year,  the  balance  of  forces  shifted  decisively  away  from  the  positions  of  AOSIS  and  ALBA,  while  the  EU  aligned  itself  more  and  more  with  the  rest  of  the  global  North.  Building  a  Radical  Climate  Justice  Movement  But  the  second  part  of  the  subtitle  of  Bond’s  book  was  “Movement  Below,”  and  in  fact  the  global  climate  justice  movement  regrouped  and  built  new  momentum  in  Cochabamba,  Bolivia  in  April  2009  to  deliver  a  magnificent  manifesto,  “The  Universal  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth.”  Many  activists,  26  from  Bond  himself  to  McKibben,  and  many  organizations  from  350.org  to  FOEI  have  withdrawn  energy  from  what  they  see  as  a  hopelessly  compromised  process  in  the  COPs,  and  put  it  instead  into  local  and  national-­‐level  campaigns  and  building  networked  global  coalitions.  These  have  brought  us  some  of  the  epic  struggles  of  recent  years,  from  the  many-­‐sided  battle  over  the  Keystone  pipeline  to  the  ongoing  movements  against  fracking  sprouting  across  the  United  States  to  the  community  fight  to  stop  the  expansion  of  the  port  in  south  Durban,  South  Africa  into  the  largest  on  the  continent.  Alongside  these  struggles  a  new  front  inside  and  around  the  COP  has  emerged  in  the  form  of  a  strengthened  and  newly  powerful  global  youth  climate  justice  movement,  which  has  been  blossoming  from  one  COP  to  the  next.  This  movement  is  also  active  in  many  local  campaigns.  They’ve  mounted  the  fossil  free  divestment  campaigns  in  the  U.S.  and  the  UK,  are  playing  an  important  role  in  the  epic  battle  against  the  Keystone  XL  pipeline  in  Canada  and  the  U.S.  alongside  a  revitalized  Canadian  indigenous  movement  led  by  Idle  No  More,  and  have  energized  the  anti-­‐  fracking  movement  in  California  and  elsewhere.  They  have  brought  to  the  movement  a  new  generation  influenced  by  the  moment  of  Occupy  and  other  movements  with  a  strong  emphasis  on  consensus  decision-­‐making  and  non-­‐hierarchical  organizational  structures  (a  process  known  as  “horizontalism”).  Additionally,  they’ve  brought  along  some  new  and  not-­‐so-­‐new  ways  of  organizing  that  have  real  promise:  Power  Shift,  social  media  of  all  kinds,  and  vast  reserves  of  imagination,  energy,  openness,  and  hope.  In  a  word,  they  are  re-­‐imagining  climate  justice.43  The  time  has  never  been  more  urgent  for  “assembling  the  biggest  social  movement  the  world  has  ever  seen”  to  combat  “the  biggest  crisis  humanity  has  ever  faced”  (to  paraphrase  Bill  McKibben).  Consider  the  following:  parts  of  the  radical  left  are  turning  their  attention  to  climate  change,  while  the  radical  climate  justice  movement  is  turning  its  attention  to  anti-­‐capitalist  politics.  At  the  same  time,  the  Big  Green  environmental  organizations  (especially  the  Sierra  Club),  the  mainstream  global  climate  justice  movement  (such  as  CAN,  the  Climate  Action  Network,  which  publishes  the  indispensable  Eco  daily  briefings  at  the  COP),  and  the  biggest  climate  social  movement  organization  (350.org)  are  all  moving  in  more  radical  directions.  The  same  can  be  said  of  climate  science  in  general  (the  directness  of  the  IPCC’s  Fifth  Assessment  Report,  among  others)  and  particular  climate  scientists  such  as  Kevin  Anderson,  Alice  Bows,  Michael  Mann,  or  James  Hansen.  Finally,  there  is  an  enormous  push  coming  up  from  young  people,  and  from  indigenous  forces  on  all  of  these  levels.  The  Present  Moment  The  question  that  the  global  climate  justice  movement  is  now  asking  is  what  are  the  prospects  for  synergy  and  movement  building  among  all  the  forces  fighting  for  the  climate  in  one  way  or  another?  What  are  the  ways  forward?  24  “Re-­‐Imagining  Climate  Justice”  is  the  name  given  to  a  gathering  of  the  movement  in  Santa  Barbara,  California,  in  May  2014  in  which  I  played  a  role  ();  see  Summer  Gray’s  video  at    27  It’s  past  time  for  the  movement  to  engage  all  hands  in  a  major  re-­‐think  moving  forward.  As  Paul  Wapner,  has  put  it:  “The  scarcest  resource  these  days  …  is  the  ability  to  unleash  the  mind,  heart,  and  spirit  to  envision,  entertain,  and  develop  unorthodox  possibilities….  Imagination,  in  this  sense,  is  not  a  flight  of  fancy  but  closer  to  what  C.  Wright  Mills  understands  as  the  ability  to  grasp  a  larger  arc  of  collective  experience  and  interpret  its  meaning  for  the  choices  we  face.  This  involves  disciplined  inspiration,  creativity,  and  ingenuity  that  can  help  us  cognitively  and  emotionally  enter  into  alternative  futures.”44  This  is  not  to  accuse  anyone  of  lack  of  imagination  –  far  from  it.  I  take  it  as  a  call  to  mobilize  our  brilliant  creativity  and  unleash  our  radical  imaginations  to  work  together  with  new  resolve  and  joy.  And  so,  I  offer  here  a  few  of  the  many,  many  possibilities  (I  am  not  saying  I  support  all  of  these;  they  are  offered  here  only  for  discussion):  At  the  COP:  go  to  a  majority  vote  on  the  treaty.  What  if,  say,  120  countries  ratified  a  treaty  covering  more  than  50  percent  of  the  world  population  and/or  emissions?  Might  this  force  the  United  States,  China,  the  EU,  the  BRICs  to  join  later?  What  if  there  were  ways  to  incentivize  one  or  more  of  these  big  emitters  to  join  the  “majority”?  What  if  –  for  the  sake  of  argument  –  we  were  to  accept  Obama’s  latest  proposal  to  avoid  the  non-­‐  starter  of  ratification  of  a  binding  treaty  by  the  U.S.  Senate  by  negotiating  non-­‐binding  pledges  only?45  Conversely,  it’s  conceivable  (if  not  likely)  that  a  “big  two”  (China  and  the  44  Paul  Wapner,  book  description  for  Reimagining  Climate  Change,  informal  communication,  summer  2014.  45  Cf.  Ben  Adler,  “Obama  has  a  Plan  for  Getting  around  Senate  Opposition  to  a  Climate  Treaty”  (August  27,  2014).  U.S.)  or  “three  or  four”  (with  the  E.U.  or  India,  etc.)  could  broker  a  deal.  Whether  it  would  be  a  good  deal  is  another  question  and  hurdle  to  surmount.  In  any  case,  it’s  time  to  abandon  the  fruitless  search  for  consensus  among  irreconcilable  visions  of  the  future,  some  of  which  are  counter-­‐productive,  if  not  genocidal,  and  which  allows  climate  criminals  like  the  current  governments  of  Canada,  Saudi  Arabia,  Australia,  or  Poland  to  obstruct,  dilute,  and  veto  the  necessary  treaty  provisions.  No  longer  should  one  or  two  recalcitrant  parties  possess  the  power  to  hold  hostage  humanity’s  future.  The  Social  Pre-­‐COP.  In  terms  of  the  build-­‐up  to  the  COP  21  in  Paris,  we  may  note  a  number  of  developments,  starting  with  the  intriguing  Venezuelan  initiative  to  hold  two  “Social  Pre-­‐  COP”  gatherings  in  2014  focused  on  youth,  indigenous  peoples,  and  various  movement  capacity  building  gatherings.  As  Venezuela’s  lead  negotiator  Claudia  Salerno  put  it  in  announcing  it  at  the  2013  Warsaw  COP  19,  “A  situation  of  madness  requires  a  little  craziness,”  adding,  “We  are  not  afraid  to  fail….  [There  is]  nothing  to  lose,  and  maybe  a  lot  to  gain.”  At  the  first  of  these  in  mid-­‐July  those  present  issued  the  Margarita  Declaration,  a  13-­‐page  manifesto  which  concluded:  “We  need  to  create  our  own  dreams,  forget  the  perverse  developmentalist  dream,  and  find  inspiration  in  ourselves.  We  need  to  share  a  new  narrative  based  on  our  own  experiences.”46  A  second  Social  Pre-­‐COP  is  scheduled  for  November  4-­‐7  in  Caracas.  The  Global  Climate  Convergence  and  System  Change  Not  Climate  Change.  Another  major  new  campaign,  in  the  United  States,  is  the  46  The  Margarita  Declaration  on  Climate  Change,  Margarita  Island,  Social  PreCOP  Preparatory  Meeting,  Venezuela  (July  18,  2014):  Changing  the  system,  not  the  climate.  This  manifesto  is  also  found  in  the  Appendix  to  our  Report.  28  Global  Climate  Convergence,  which  proclaims  “People,  Planet,  Peace  over  Profits”  and  is  seeking  to  build  “collaboration  across  national  borders  and  fronts  of  struggle  to  harness  the  transformative  power  we  already  possess  as  a  thousand  separate  movements  springing  up  across  the  planet.”  The  basic  idea  is  to  create  a  lasting  collaboration  between  climate  activism  and  other  forms  of  social  justice,  including  progressive  labor,  indigenous  organizing,  and  the  fledgling  ecosocialist  movement  in  the  United  States,  and  ultimately,  no  doubt,  beyond.  Convened  by  Jill  Stein,  2012  presidential  candidate  of  the  Green  Party  of  the  United  States,  this  call  resonates  with  the  formation  of  the  new  U.S.  ecosocialist  organization  System  Change  Not  Climate  Change),  which  aims  at  shifting  the  momentum  of  the  climate  justice  movement  in  an  anti-­‐capitalist  direction  by  starting  “a  far-­‐ranging  discussion  within  society:  can  stopping  climate  change  be  compatible  with  an  economic  system  that  is  flooded  with  fossil  fuel  profits?  Can  we  create  a  safe  and  healthy  planet  for  all  human  beings  while  simultaneously  allowing  ever-­‐expanding  resource  extraction,  endless  growth,  and  the  massive  inequalities  that  come  along  with  it?”  The  People’s  Climate  March.  Meanwhile,  the  faltering  momentum  for  a  global  climate  deal  received  a  strong  new  push  at  the  People’s  Climate  March  attended  by  some  400,000  people  in  New  York  City  on  September  21,  2014,  an  event  which  may  well  be  seen  in  future  histories  as  the  turning  point  in  the  evolution  of  a  strong  North  American  climate  justice  movement.47  When  U.N.  Secretary-­‐  General  Ban  Ki-­‐moon  convened  a  special  Climate  Summit  2014:  Catalyzing  Action  with  the  charge:  “This  Summit  is  meant  to  be  a  47  See    and    19-­‐ny-­‐climate-­‐convergence-­‐2014-­‐09-­‐19-­‐211500  solutions  summit,  not  a  negotiating  session.  I  have  invited  all  Heads  of  State  and  Government,  along  with  leaders  from  business  and  finance,  local  government  and  civil  society.  I  am  asking  all  who  come  to  bring  bold  and  new  announcements  and  action.  I  am  asking  them  to  bring  their  big  ideas,”48  very  little  happened  inside  the  UN  but  a  lot  happened  on  the  outside:  the  multiple  workshops,  gatherings,  and  public  events  in  the  days  leading  up  to  the  march,  the  unprecedented,  massive,  diverse  climate  march  itself,  the  “Flood  Wall  Street”  direct  action  of  the  following  day,  and  the  countless  initiatives  that  are  bound  to  emerge  from  the  thousands  of  people  who  saw  their  commitment  grow  and  their  possibilities  for  action  widen  as  a  result  of  their  participation.  An  important  agenda  item  for  this  gathering  might  be  the  development  of  a  people’s  plan  for  radical  emissions  reductions  (I  propose  some  tentative  first  thoughts  on  this  in  an  appendix  to  this  essay.  Just  as  Ban  had  hoped  to  kickstart  a  UN  process  that  is  driven  by  stalemate  from  above,  the  global  climate  justice  movement  is  building  fresh  momentum  from  below  as  it  strives  to  find  the  ways  to  bring  into  full  flowering  the  biggest  social  movement  the  world  has  ever  seen.  What  Now?  Thinking  Forward  What  follows  from  our  observations  to  this  point?  I  offer  a  few  ideas  for  discussion  here  as  a  contribution  to  the  global  process  of  figuring  out  how  to  move  forward.  Our  movement  should  aim  beyond  capitalism  48  Ban  Ki-­‐moon,  “Big  Idea  2014:  The  Year  for  Climate  Action”  (December  11,  2013),    idea-­‐2014-­‐the-­‐year-­‐for-­‐climate-­‐action/  29  It  seems  to  me  that  the  only  real  systemic  “solution”  to  the  crisis  is  a  radical  anti-­‐  capitalist  climate  justice  movement  capable  of  decisively  cutting  emissions  in  a  just  way.  This  movement,  or  convergence  and  confluence  of  many  movements,  has  to  be  a  broad  anti-­‐capitalist  movement,  and  it  has  to  get  there  in  the  relatively  medium  term  (the  next  25-­‐50  years,  or  by  2040  to  2065).  In  the  short  term  (from  now  out  10-­‐15  years,  or  from  2015  to  2025  or  2030),  the  task  is  to  build  a  broad  radical  climate  justice  movement  everywhere  we  can,  preparing  a  new  generation  for  the  longer  anti-­‐capitalist  project  of  deep  social  transformation.  We  also  have  to  learn  more  about  how  to  build  social  movements  and,  perhaps,  a  totally  new  and  different  kind  of  political  party  (we  need  much  speculation  about  this),  because  the  two  together  might  succeed  where  individually  they  have  not.  This  is  the  central  thesis  of  another  project  I  am  working  on  that  surveys  radical  social  movements  in  the  twenty-­‐first  century,  contrasting  them  with  the  social  revolutions  that  tried  to  shape  positive  social  transformation  in  the  twentieth.49  We  need  to  learn  our  own  power  and  how  to  use  it  wisely  to  transcend  the  polarizing  debate  between  the  horizontalism  of  Occupy  and  efforts  to  transform  societies  by  bringing  progressive  political  forces  to  state  power.  Our  politics  within  that  movement  have  to  be  informed  by  our  anti-­‐capitalism,  and  positively,  we  need  to  do  some  thinking  about  what  to  call  our  vision  of  a  post-­‐  49  The  arguments  are  sketched  in  a  preliminary  fashion  in  John  Foran,  “Beyond  Insurgency  to  Radical  Social  Change:  The  New  Situation,”  Studies  in  Social  Justice  8  (1)  (2014):  5-­‐  25.  capitalist  future,  what  it  will  look  like,  and,  of  course,  how  to  get  there  on  schedule.  Going  global  One  approach  to  understanding  the  current  state  of  play  would  be  a  country  by  country  analysis  of  the  top  ten  emitting  nations:  their  climate  profile,  their  political  situation,  the  state  of  their  civil  society  (suffering?  unemployed?  worries  about  what?),  and  the  strength  of  their  climate  justice  movement.  From  here  one  could  try  to  work  out  a  regional  analysis  of  this  kind  as  well,  as  a  prelude  to  a  global  analysis.  This  kind  of  detailed  analysis  is  far  beyond  the  scope  of  what  I  can  do  here.  No  matter  how  it  would  look,  it  seems  clear  that  we  need  to  strengthen  and  make  connections  within  and  between  such  places  as:  n North  America  –  the  U.S.  and  Canada,  because  these  constitute,  respectively,  the  biggest  problem  country  in  the  world,  and  one  of  the  dirtiest  rich  countries  (along  with  Australia).  The  fronts  are  the  battle  against  the  tar  sands  and  Keystone  pipeline,  the  fossil  fuel  divestment  movement,  and  the  hundreds,  perhaps  thousands,  of  local  environmental  justice  struggles.  The  New  York  City  People’s  Climate  March  in  September  2014  is  evidence  that  we  are  in  the  first  stages  of  building  a  big,  powerful  new  radical  climate  justice  movement  including,  among  others,  350.org,  SCNCC,  the  Green  Party  of  the  USA,  the  Climate  Justice  Alliance/Our  Power  campaign,  the  Cowboy  and  Indian  Alliance,  the  Indigenous  Environmental  Network,  Idle  No  More,  the  Climate  Action  Network,  Sierra  Club,  the  youth  climate  justice  movement,  PowerShift,  Occupy,  indymedia  and  climate  bloggers  and  websites,  churches,  30  universities,  the  huge  numbers  of  communities  on  the  front  lines  where  all  kinds  of  environmental  and  climate  justice  grassroots  work  is  happening,  progressive  unions,  feminists,  anti-­‐racists,  and  anarchists.  n The  European  Union  and  Europe  more  generally  –  the  U.K.,  Germany,  Scandinavia,  along  with  others,  such  as  the  short-­‐lived  Green-­‐Left  experiment  in  Iceland  –  have  led  the  global  North’s  governments  in  the  direction  along  which  they  need  to  go  much  further:  renewable  energy,  green  building,  attractive  public  transportation  networks,  and  so  on.  To  get  the  global  North  on  board  for  a  just  climate  treaty  will  require  strong  leadership  from  the  EU,  or  at  least  a  few  key  European  countries,  to  push  for  deep  and  legally  binding  cuts,  a  good  deal  beyond  anything  proposed  so  far  from  that  quarter.  This,  in  turn,  requires  progressive,  accountable  political  parties  in  power,  and  to  achieve  that  requires  strong  national-­‐  level  climate  justice  movements.  n The  BASIC  countries  -­‐-­‐  Brazil:  one  could  imagine  the  Movement  of  Landless  Workers  (MST)  and  a  radicalized  Workers  Party  –  the  governing  PT,  if  it  can  be  done,  or  if  not,  perhaps  progressive  members  of  the  PT  joining  to  form  an  ecologically  minded  party  with  the  independent  left  or  perhaps  the  Green  Party  -­‐-­‐  might  fuse  into  something  new.50  50  In  the  first  round  of  the  October  6,  2014  presidential  elections,  incumbent  Dilma  Yousef  polled  41  percent  (43  million  votes),  right-­‐winger  Aécio  Neves  34  percent  (35  million)  ,  and  Green  candidate  Marina  Silva  21  percent  (22  million),  suggesting  that  such  a  new  type  of  party  might  one  day  be  viable.  Disappointingly,  Silva  backed  Neves  in  the  runoff,  suggesting  just  how  much  work  needs  to  be  done.  -­‐-­‐  India:  The  impressive  half-­‐century  of  sustainable  social  democratic  society  established  in  Kerala  contains  the  seeds  of  a  better  development  model  that  should  be  studied  more  widely.51  On  the  other  hand,  the  new  Prime  Minister,  Narendra  Modi,  was  actually  in  New  York  the  day  of  the  U.N.  climate  summit,  but  didn’t  attend.52  -­‐-­‐  China:  The  contradictions  of  China’s  breakneck  industrial  growth  have  caused  countless  local  pushbacks  from  communities  which  are  suffering  the  effects  of  pollution  and  poisoning  of  their  land  and  water;  the  same  is  true  of  wildcat  labor  strikes.  Both  trends  are  increasingly  eliciting  new  climate  change  policy  from  the  government,  well  aware  of  the  paradoxes  of  its  relatively  recent  emergence  as  the  single  greatest  contributor  to  emissions  and  simultaneously  the  world’s  greatest  consumer  of  coal  and  producer  of  solar  power.53  Meanwhile,  according  to  a  Pew  Research  poll,  China  and  the  U.S.  are  virtually  tied  as  the  most  poorly  educated  populations  in  climate  change  (although  51  Though  dated,  the  best  overview  of  Kerala  remains  Richard  W.  Franke  and  Barbara  H.  Chasin,  Kerala:  Radical  Reform  as  Development  in  an  Indian  State  (San  Francisco:  The  Institute  for  Food  and  Development  Policy,  1994).  ).  52  A  key  text  on  climate  politics  in  India  is  Praful  Bidwai’s  The  Politics  of  Climate  Change  and  the  Global  Crisis:  Mortgaging  Our  Future  (Orient  Blackswan,  2011).  For  recent  pieces  on  the  new  government  of  prime  minister  Narendra  Modi,  see  Carl  Pope,  “What  American  Environmentalists  Can  Learn  From  Prime  Minister  Modi”  (October  3,  2014);  Ben  Adler,  “Yoga  could  be  an  answer  to  climate  change,  says  India’s  prime  minister”  (October  1,  2014);  and  Siddhartha  Deb,  “What  Is  India?  Why  India’s  boom  years  have  been  a  bust”  (September  16,  2014).  53  Good  recent  journalism  on  China  includes  Jaeah  Lee  and  James  West,  “China’s  coal  addiction  threatens  the  planet  —  but  can  it  handle  a  natural  gas  revolution?”  (September  18,  2014);  Alexander  Reid  Ross,  “China:  Mass  protests  challenge  polluters”  (April  7,  2014);  James  West,  “China  just  got  serious  about  global  warming.  Now  we’re  really  out  of  excuses.”  (September  6,  2014),;  and  especially  Jeff  Goodell,  “China,  the  Climate  and  the  Fate  of  the  Planet”  (September  15,  2014).  31  with  the  average  American’s  carbon  footprint  still  three  times  greater  than  the  average  citizen  of  China,  it’s  clear  whose  ignorance  is  more  damaging).  -­‐-­‐  South  Africa  –  a  socialist  and  ecological  alternative  must  be  found  to  the  anti-­‐  democratic  extractivist  political  economy  of  the  ruling  African  National  Congress  (ANC),  and  there  are  particularly  strong  climate  justice  movements  inside  the  country  such  as  the  South  Durban  Community  Environmental  Alliance.54  n Latin  America  -­‐-­‐  Despite  numerous  problems  and  the  heavy  contradictions  of  being  based  on  extractive  industries,  the  three  most  radical  “Pink  Tide”  countries  –  Bolivia,  Ecuador,  and  Venezuela  –  have  put  forth  the  idea  of  trying  to  create  a  new  kind  of  democratic  “socialism  for  the  twenty-­‐first  century”  and,  in  the  first  two,  the  indigenous  idea  of  “buen  vivir”  already  inscribed  into  the  constitutions  of  Ecuador  and  Bolivia,  giving  hope  that  we  may  see  the  first  instances  of  an  “ecosocialism  for  the  twenty-­‐first  century”  in  the  coming  decade.  -­‐-­‐  An  even  longer-­‐lived  indigenous  experiment  with  deep  democracy  has  been  pioneered  by  the  Zapatistas  in  Chiapas,  and  offers  further  clues  of  what  a  twenty-­‐first  century  ecosocialism  (regardless  of  what  it  is  called)  might  look  like.  n Africa  and  the  Middle  East  54  See  John  Vidal,  “South  Africa’s  ‘cancer  alley’  residents  face  new  threat  from  port  development”  (April  28,  2014),    development/2014/apr/28/south-­‐africa-­‐cancer-­‐alley-­‐port-­‐  development  -­‐-­‐  Africa,  one  of  the  centers  of  gravity  for  climate  disruption  and  chaos,  is  home  to  the  Pan  African  Climate  Justice  Alliance  –  PACJA  –  a  network  formed  in  2008  and  now  numbering  over  1,000  organizations  of  farmers,  religious  organizations,  NGOs,  and  others  with  “a  common  goal  of  promoting  and  advocating  for  Pro-­‐poor,  climate-­‐  friendly  and  equity-­‐based  responses  to  climate  change.”55  -­‐-­‐  The  COP  18  meetings  in  Doha,  Qatar,  were  the  occasion  for  the  emergence  of  the  Arab  Youth  Climate  Justice  Movement  (AYCM),  whose  activists  are  now  organizing  in  fifteen  countries.  The  AYCM  has  been  very  active  with  the  global  youth  climate  justice  movement  at  subsequent  COPs  and  is  building  national  movements  across  North  Africa  and  the  Middle  East  from  the  ground  up.  Among  their  approaches  is  to  view  the  climate  crisis  as  “an  opportunity  to  create  a  more  sustainable,  prosperous,  meaningful,  just,  and  fair  world.”56  -­‐-­‐  Finally,  it  should  be  noted  that  Tunisia,  the  only  Arab  Spring  country  which  has  established  a  reasonably  well-­‐functioning  representative  democracy,  re-­‐wrote  its  constitution  after  the  fall  of  the  dictator,  Ben  Ali,  to  include  reference  to  fighting  climate  change.57  n Oceania  and  the  “small”  island  states  55  See  their  website  at    us/  56  The  AYCM  maintains  a  strong  presence  at    57  John  Upton,  Tunisia’s  new  constitution  calls  for  climate  protection  (February  4,  2014),    new-­‐constitution-­‐calls-­‐for-­‐climate-­‐  protection/?utm_source=newsletter&utm_medium=email&  utm_term=Daily%2520Feb%25204&utm_campaign=daily  32  -­‐-­‐  The  loss  of  climate  hero  Mohamed  Nasheed  in  the  2013  election  in  his  country  has  set  back  the  global  cause  for  climate  justice  enormously.  He  and  his  Minister  of  the  Environment,  Mohamed  Aslam,  were  among  the  most  far-­‐sighted  and  eloquent  voices  on  behalf  of  Oceania  and  all  small  island  states  everywhere.58  -­‐-­‐  In  their  place,  we  have  a  variety  of  initiatives,  from  Tuvalu,  Nauru,  and  elsewhere,  as  well  as  the  new  voice  of  Marshallese  poet  Kathy  Jetnil-­‐Kijiner,  who  delivered  the  greatest  speech  at  the  UN  special  summit  convened  by  Ban  Ki-­‐moon.59  Principles,  practices,  dreams,  and  hope:  constructing  vibrant  political  cultures  of  opposition  and  creation  Conceptually,  the  concepts  of  political  cultures  of  opposition  and  creation  have  helped  me  think  about  the  problem  of  how  strong  social  movements  are  born.60  None  of  the  revolutions  of  the  twentieth  century  was  made  without  powerful  political  cultures  of  opposition  capable  of  bringing  diverse  social  groups  to  the  side  of  a  movement  for  deep  social  change,  as  happened  in  the  Mexican,  Russian,  Chinese,  Cuban,  Nicaraguan,  and  Iranian  revolutions.  These  political  cultures  drew  on  people’s  experiences  and  emotions  and  were  expressed  in  complex  mixtures  of  popular,  everyday  ways  of  expressing  grievances  –  fairness,  justice,  dignity,  or  58  See  Summer  Gray  and  John  Foran,  “Climate  Injustice:  The  Real  History  of  the  Maldives,”  Berkeley  Journal  of  Sociology  58  (September  2014),    real-­‐history-­‐of-­‐the-­‐maldives/  59  The  speech  can  be  heard  at    60  John  Foran,  “Global  Affinities:  The  New  Cultures  of  Resistance  behind  the  Arab  Spring,”  pp.  45-­‐71  in  Mehran  Kamrava,  editor,  The  Evolving  Ruling  Bargain  in  the  Middle  East  (Oxford:  Oxford  University  Press,  2014).  freedom  –  and  more  consciously  articulated  radical  ideologies  such  as  socialism  and  liberation  theology.  The  most  effective  revolutionary  movements  of  history  have  found  ways  to  tap  into  whatever  political  cultures  emerge  in  their  society,  often  through  the  creation  of  a  common  goal  such  as  “the  regime  must  step  down”  or  “the  foreign  powers  must  leave.”  The  forging  of  a  strong  and  vibrant  political  culture  of  opposition  is  thus  an  accomplishment,  carried  through  by  the  actions  of  many  people,  and,  like  revolutions  themselves,  such  cultures  are  relatively  rare  in  human  history.  In  the  twenty-­‐first  century,  the  nature  of  movements  for  what  we  might  now  call  radical  social  change  (rather  than  revolution)  has  itself  changed,  as  activists,  reformers,  dreamers,  and  revolutionaries  globally  have  more  often  pursued  nonviolent  paths  to  a  better  world,  intending  to  live  and  act  as  they  would  like  that  world  to  be.  That  is,  the  ends  of  justice  are  no  longer  held  to  justify  the  means  of  violence,  but  the  means  of  non-­‐  violent  resistance  reflect  and  guarantee  the  ends  that  they  seek.  In  this,  they  embody  and  illustrate  the  virtues  of  prefigurative  politics  and  in  particular,  horizontalist  ways  to  realize  them.  I  call  these  positive,  alternative  visions  “political  cultures  of  creation.”  61  Movements  become  even  stronger,  when  to  a  widely  felt  culture  of  opposition  and  resistance,  they  add  a  positive  vision  of  a  better  world,  an  alternative  to  strive  for  to  improve  or  replace  61  Foran,  “Beyond  Insurgency  to  Radical  Social  Change.”  33  what  exists.  In  this  sense,  some  of  the  differences  between  old  and  new  movements  for  radical  social  change  seem  to  include  the  attempt  to  get  away  from  the  hierarchical  organizations  that  made  the  great  revolutions  and  move  in  the  direction  of  more  horizontal,  deeply  democratic  relations  among  participants;  the  expressive  power  of  using  popular  idioms  more  than  ideological  discourses;  the  growing  use  of  nonviolence;  the  building  of  coalitions  as  networks  of  movements  and  organizations  to  include  diverse  outlooks;  and  the  salience  of  political  cultures  of  creation  alongside  political  cultures  of  opposition  and  resistance.  What  might  go  into  a  radical  political  culture  of  climate  justice?  On  the  level  of  emotions,  we  would  perhaps  do  well  to  cultivate  what  Gustavo  Esteva  has  termed  “joyful  militancy:”  We  are  suggesting  that  a  useful  way  to  think  about  radical  politics  is  through  the  lens  of  joy  and  sadness….  Joy  means  letting  the  world  in  and  letting  oneself  into  the  world:  being  vulnerable,  compassionate,  experimental,  creative,  and  embracing  uncertainty.  Sadness  means  creating  boundaries,  making  distinctions,  comparing,  making  plans,  and  so  on….  All  movements,  spaces,  collectives,  and  individuals  have  elements  of  joy  and  sadness:  they’re  bound  together,  they  help  and  hinder  each  other,  and  they’re  constantly  shifting  and  changing.  We  often  need  good  boundaries  to  create  radical  spaces  in  an  oppressive  world,  we  need  to  make  plans  and  be  open  to  changing  them  and  changing  ourselves.  Our  suspicion,  or  feeling,  or  hunch,  or  experience  is  that  there  is  too  much  sadness  and  not  enough  joy  in  a  lot  of  radical  movements  and  spaces  today.  There  is  a  lot  of  energy  and  investment  in  thinking  intellectually,  making  distinctions,  closure,  and  creating  boundaries,  and  we  think  that  is  squeezing  out  possibilities  for  conviviality,  creativity,  and  kindness….  However–and  this  is  REALLY  important  to  us–while  we  are  making  a  distinction  here,  we  are  not  trying  to  construct  a  simple  binary.  We’re  calling  joy  and  sadness  an  “ecology”  because  there  are  always  elements  of  both  in  our  movements….  Furthermore,  this  is  less  about  individuals  and  their  identifications  and  more  about  collective  spaces,  desires,  and  movements.  We  are  arguing  that  “sad  militancy”  is  hegemonic:  that  it  predominates  in  many  radical  spaces  today,  squeezing  out  possibilities  for  conviviality  and  friendship.  We’re  trying  to  offer  up  a  conception  of  “joyful  militancy”  based  on  spaces,  movements,  thinkers,  and  doers  who  have  inspired  us,  but  there’s  no  formula  or  guidebook.  Even  more  importantly,  we  really  don’t  want  to  suggest  a  new  set  of  norms  that  should  govern  or  police  people  into  behaving  a  certain  way:  that  would  be  an  utter  failure.  We  hope  joyful  militancy  can  remain  loose  and  34  vague,  while  offering  up  some  ideas  that  are  inspiring  and  useful  to  think  through.62  Similarly,  it  might  be  important  to  cultivate  new  languages  and  ways  of  being  together;  here,  one  might  think  of  the  whole  Occupy  repertoire,  so  well  captured  in  the  book  and  website,  Beautiful  Trouble.  Or  the  “meme  projects”  –  Patrick  Reinsborough  and  Doyle  Canning’s  handbook,    Change:  An  Introduction  to  Story-­‐based  Strategy;  Occupy’s  “We  ...  are…  the  99  percent!”  Or  drawing  from  the  history  of  our  own  movement,  that  simple  profound  slogan  “System  Change,  Not  Climate  Change,”  so  evocative  and  powerful  (and  very  astutely  chosen  by  the  new  North  American  network  of  the  same  name).  In  all  of  this,  “artivism,”  creativity,  and  love  are  the  prominent,  and  youth  movements  everywhere  are  inventing  and  carrying  the  new  political  cultures  of  creation.  As  for  new  ideas  about  building  alliances,  one  idea  that  lots  of  people  are  finding  illuminating  is  “the  spectrum  of  allies  and  opponents  model”:  62  Gustavo  Esteva,  “The  Ecology  of  Joy  in  Our  Radical  Movements  and  Spaces,”    ecology-­‐of-­‐joy-­‐in-­‐our-­‐radical-­‐movements-­‐and-­‐spaces/  Veronika  Libao  explains  the  idea  this  way:  The  most  important  thing  this  movement  has  to  realize  in  order  to  accomplish  its  goal  is  the  fact  that  it  can  never  convince  everyone,  and  that  is  completely  fine….The  “spectrum  of  allies”  model  avoids  wasting  valuable  energy  in  convincing  those  in  active  opposition.  Instead,  it  focuses  on  shifting  those  in  a  passive  opposition  to  neutral,  those  in  a  neutral  position  to  passive  allies,  and  passive  allies  to  active  allies  (as  shown  in  the  diagram).  As  disheartening  it  is  to  know  that  there  are  those  who  openly  choose  to  ignore  climate  change,  there  are  plenty  of  others  who  devote  their  lives  to  ensuring  that  those  people  don’t  ruin  the  planet  for  all  of  us.63  The  key  is  to  unlock  ways  to  bring  together  increasingly  radical,  increasingly  broad  forces  together,  to  multiply  our  impact  and  networks  exponentially,  learn  to  build  the  bridges,  and  generate  the  new  ideas  we  need.  The  Briefest  of  Conclusions  What  everyone  brings  to  the  table  in  the  struggle  for  global  climate  justice  has  value.  The  movements  for  climate  justice  around  the  world  need  all  hands  on  deck,  now  and  for  as  far  as  anyone  can  see  into  the  future.  This  is  the  challenge  the  global  climate  justice  movement  faces  now.  63  Veronika  Libao,  “The  Cheapening  of  Our  Lives:  Consumerism  and  its  Inevitable  Link  to  Climate  Change,”  a  paper  for  Sociology  134GJ:  Global  Justice  Movements,  UC  Santa  Barbara  (Summer  2014),  where  this  image  is  from.  The  “Spectrum  of  Allies”  was  presented  to  us  by  United  Kingdom  Youth  Climate  Coalition  members  Fatima  Ibrahim  and  Louisa  Casson.  35  Appendix:  Some  Principles  for  Radical  Emissions  Reduction  based  on  Climate  Justice  1. The  target  should  be  1.5  degrees  Celsius,  not  2  degrees.  2. The  burning  of  fossil  fuels  for  energy  has  to  be  rolled  back  decisively  and  quickly.  This  might  mean,  for  example,  cuts  of  ten  percent  a  year  starting  immediately  (or  one  percent,  then  increasing  by  two  percent  per  year  till  we  reach  10  percent  in  2020,  and  ten  percent  a  year  thereafter  till  we  approach  zero  emissions  by  2030.  The  sooner  we  start  on  this  path,  the  better.  3. The  global  South  –  and  indeed  all  peoples  –  have  a  “right  to  sustainable  development.”  From  this  it  follows  that  there  has  to  be  massive  redistribution  of  technology  and  funds  from  North  to  South  –  for  adaptation,  for  emissions  reductions,  for  meeting  the  basic  needs  of  every  human  on  the  planet,  for  the  loss  and  damages  of  extreme  weather  events  already  locked  into  Earth’s  climate  future.  4.  The  above  should  be  agreed  by  every  government  on  earth,  in  2015,  and  if  not  then,  we  must  step  up  our  resistance  exponentially  until  it  is  agreed.  What  this  means  should  be  thought  about  and  discussed  in  the  build-­‐up  to  December  2015.  36  Protecting  Climate  Policy  from  Dirty  Energy  Lobbying:  A  Working  Strategy  Document  Pascoe  Sabido  This  document  attempts  to  show  how  we  can  use  COP21  in  Paris  as  an  opportunity  to  lay  the  groundwork  and  build  the  political  and  public  support  for  a  mechanism  at  national,  regional  and  UNFCCC  levels  to  protect  climate  policy  making  from  the  dirty  energy  industry.  It  is  intended  as  a  basis  for  conversation,  to  be  worked  on  and  developed.  Problem  The  influence  of  the  dirty  energy  lobby  is  the  greatest  barrier  to  achieving  climate  policies  to  deliver  a  fair,  just  and  sustainable  world.  They  are  preventing  governments  in  the  global  north  fulfilling  their  obligations  under  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  (UNFCCC)64,  holding  back  an  equitable  and  ambitious  deal  at  the  international  level.  Through  their  influence,  these  same  corporations  –  whose  business  model  is  responsible  for  the  crisis  we  are  facing  –  are  profiting  from  the  promotion  of  false  solutions  that  worsen  the  crisis  and  generate  huge  profits.  Current  state  of  play  Dirty  energy  lobbying  –  and  corporate  influence  in  general  –  reached  unprecedented  levels  at  the  last  UNFCCC  talks  in  Warsaw,  COP19.  There  was  a  business-­‐only  pre-­‐COP,  multiple  corporate  64  The  UNFCCC  is  the  only  inclusive  multilateral  space  which  also  enshrines  the  top-­‐down,  rules-­‐based  approach  alongside  principles  of  equity  (historical  responsibility  enshrined  in  the  Annex  I  and  non-­‐Annex  I  system,  common  but  differentiated  responsibility,  respective  capabilities)  sponsors  including  dirty  energy  and  heavily  polluting  industries,  and  a  coal  summit  organised  alongside  the  talks,  attended  by  the  UNFCCC  Executive  Secretary  Christiana  Figueres.65  And  in  some  UNFCCC  institutions  –  like  the  Green  Climate  Fund  –  fossil  fuel  financiers  are  playing  key  roles  advising  and  making  recommendations  for  policy  governing  climate  finance.66  The  extent  to  which  the  dirty  energy  industry  was  being  listened  to  was  further  highlighted  by  more  than  800  civil  society  observers  prematurely  walking  out  of  the  talks  in  protest,  with  t-­‐  shirts  that  read  ‘polluters  talk,  we  walk’.  The  next  major  moment  in  the  talks  is  taking  place  in  2015  in  Paris,  COP21,  where  all  countries  are  supposed  to  agree  a  treaty  to  govern  the  post-­‐2020  climate  regime.  However,  current  expectations  are  very  low,  due  to  the  recalcitrance  of  Northern  governments  and  the  power  of  the  dirty  energy  lobby.  Opportunity?  There  is  a  big  opportunity  to  use  the  events  from  now  up  to  and  including  COP21  in  Paris  to  ensure  the  dirty  energy  industry  is  not  seen  as  an  acceptable  partner  in  making  climate  policy.  The  ultimate  aim  is  to  remove  them  altogether,  end  their  access  to  our  decision  makers  within  our  national  and  regional  governments  as  well  as  the  UNFCCC.  Only  by  ending  this  cosy  relationship  and  reclaiming  climate  policy  making  can  the  65  For  an  overview  of  the  corporate  capture  of  COP19,  see  Corporate  Europe  Observatory’s  blog  written  while  in  Warsaw,    climate-­‐blog  66  Bank  of  America  is  the  “developed  country”  private  sector  active  observer  to  the  Green  Climate  Fund  board,  and  XX  companies  are  serving  on  the  GCF’s  Private  Sector  Advisory  Panel  (PSAG),  which  is  responsible  for  making  recommendations  to  the  GCF  board  on  every  thing  from  fiduciary  standards  to  best  practices  on  intermediation  37  UNFCCC  deliver  an  equitable  and  ambitious  deal  for  current  and  future  generations.  It's  been  done  before  with  the  tobacco  lobby  –  Article  5.3  Other  UN  bodies  have  faced  similar  challenges  in  addressing  the  undue  influence  of  harmful  industries  and  dealt  with  the  situation  effectively,  such  as  the  UN  World  Health  Organisation  (WHO).  Article  5.3  of  its  global  tobacco  treaty,  the  Framework  Convention  on  Tobacco  Control  (FCTC),  enshrines  in  international  law  the  principle  that  the  tobacco  industry  has  no  role  in  public  health  policymaking,  due  to  the  “fundamental  and  irreconcilable  conflict  between  the  tobacco  industry's  interests  and  public  health  policy  interests”  and  states  that  "Parties  shall  act  to  protect  these  policies  from  commercial  and  other  vested  interests  of  the  tobacco  industry".67  Through  a  strong,  Southern-­‐led  civil-­‐society  coalition  working  at  national  and  international  level,  they  managed  to  achieve  this.  While  tobacco  and  fossil  fuels  are  very  different,  the  principle  of  irreconcilable  interests  –  between  that  of  industry  and  that  of  the  public  –  is  the  same.  Equally,  the  role  that  industry  has  played  in  preventing  legislation  around  both  is  very  similar,  with  Big  Energy  taking  many  of  its  strategies  directly  from  the  Big  Tobacco  playbook:  • funding  citizen  front  groups  to  provide  legitimacy  for  continued  dirty  energy  67  For  more  information  see  the  short  briefing    content/uploads//Stop-­‐Fossil-­‐Fuels-­‐Setting-­‐the-­‐  Climate-­‐Agenda_Briefing_Nov13-­‐2.pdf  or  the  longer  paper    content/uploads//Stop-­‐Fossil-­‐Fuels-­‐Setting-­‐the-­‐  Climate-­‐Agenda_Report_Dec2013_FINAL.pdf  solutions;  • manufacturing  doubt  around  climate  science  via  scientists  and  think  tanks;  • litigation  against  countries  working  to  address  climate  change;  • using  corporate  social  responsibility  activities  to  present  a  façade  of  action  while  their  core  business  model  remains  the  same;  • aggressive  lobbying  at  all  levels;  • infiltrating  key  government  arenas  at  national,  regional  and  international  level  • creating  public  partnerships  and  voluntary  solutions  to  avoid  regulation  The  tobacco  precedent  provides  a  very  powerful,  publicly-­‐understandable,  common-­‐  sense  example  which  can  be  used  further.  The  proposition  that  the  UN,  and  the  UNFCCC  in  particular,  should  take  action  to  protect  climate  policy-­‐making  from  the  dirty  energy  lobby  was  already  gaining  ground  in  Warsaw,  with  more  than  80  organisations  signing  onto  an  open  letter  to  UN  Secretary  General  Ban  Ki-­‐moon  and  UNFCCC  Executive  Secretary  Christiana  Figueres  asking  for  such  a  measure  in  light  of  the  evidence.68  More  events  since  then  show  a  growing  appetite:   French  climate  organisations  working  together  towards  COP21  wrote  to  the  three  ministers  responsible,  calling  on  them  to  introduce  a  similar  policy  to  Article  5.3  under  the  UNFCCC;69  • Approximately  300  organizations  –  most  from  the  global  south  –  penned  a  letter  to  68  See  here  for  the  English  version    protect-­‐integrity-­‐climate-­‐policy-­‐making-­‐vested-­‐corporate-­‐  interests  69  The  letter  was  written  by  Attac  France,  Centre  de  recherche  et  d’information  pour  le  développement  (CRID)  and  Réseau  Action  Climat,  with  15  other  signatories,    flux/article/climat-­‐assez-­‐de-­‐discours-­‐des-­‐actes  38  the  board  members  of  the  Green  Climate  Fund  demanding  that  dirty  energy  be  kept  out  of  the  fund;  • As  a  result  of  the  global  campaign  to  stop  corporate  impunity,  the  UN  Human  Rights  Council  agreed  to  establish  a  working  group  into  a  legally-­‐binding  instrument  over  the  operations  of  transnational  corporations;  • Increasing  numbers  of  organisations  fighting  corporate  take-­‐over  in  the  shape  of  the  US  and  EU  global  trade  deals  (TPP  and  TTIP);  • A  large  number  of  organisations  surveyed  by  the  Democracy  Centre  on  priorities  for  the  climate  movement  at  COP20  in  Lima  will  prioritise  tackling  corporate  power.  However,  for  a  strategy  to  be  successful  in  trying  to  reclaim  climate  policy  and  the  UNFCCC  from  the  dirty  energy  industries,  while  at  the  same  time  supporting  an  agenda  of  equity  and  ambition  within  it,  certain  sensitivities  must  be  taken  account  of:  • The  principles  of  equity  as  outlined  within  the  Convention  (and  contained  within  the  Rio  Declaration  of  1992)  have  been  under  attack  from  Northern  governments  (particularly  heavy  polluters  like  the  US  and  EU),  as  well  as  some  Northern  civil  society  groups  who  are  keen  to  get  any  deal  possible  even  if  it  means  sacrificing  equity,  and  thus  ambition;70  • Many  countries  in  the  global  South  70  Note:  if  equity  is  sacrificed,  then  so  is  ambition,  as  many  countries  in  the  global  South  who  are  already  taking  domestic  actions  –  and  who  have  been  waiting  since  the  signing  of  the  Kyoto  Protocol  in  1997  for  climate  leadership  from  Northern  countries  but  not  yet  seen  it  –  will  not  take  on  higher  commitments  without  either  the  finance,  technology  or  ambition  that  has  been  promised  from  Northern  countries  as  development  and  poverty  alleviation  will  be  prioritized  [very  short,  crude  summary  but  there’s  far  more  nuance  than  that].  defending  the  principles  of  equity  also  have  large  state-­‐owned  fossil  fuel  interests  and  see  cheap  energy  as  key  to  the  economic  growth  they  see  as  necessary  to  address  the  impacts  of  climate  change  as  well  as  poverty;  • Most  countries  in  the  global  South  will  have  far  less  capacity  within  the  negotiations  and  may  have  their  energy  companies  on  their  delegations,  while  Northern  governments  will  have  far  more  capacity  and  no  need  for  them  on  delegations  but  will  have  fully  consulted  them  beforehand;  • Parts  of  the  climate  justice  movement  have  already  rejected  the  UNFCCC  space  as  it  has  failed  to  deliver  and  is  technocratising  the  debate,  distancing  it  from  local  struggles  and  playing  into  the  hands  of  big  business  by  focusing  on  accounting,  measurements  and  markets  rather  than  drivers;  • Most  dirty  energy  lobbying  takes  place  in  the  capitals,  before  negotiators  and  delegations  arrive  (although  there  is  plenty  of  overt  capture,  from  side  events  to  sponsorship  to  parallel  summits)  and  the  UNFCCC  is  a  symptom  rather  than  a  cause  of  the  increasing  proximity  between  the  dirty  energy  industry  and  climate  policy  (although  certain  key  personalities  within  the  Secretariat  and  the  UN  are  also  driving  this  phenomenon);  • Paris  2015  is  likely  to  be  a  disaster  from  a  climate  perspective,  and  an  incredibly  fraught  and  tense  negotiation,  with  a  huge  battle  over  who  is  responsible  for  the  failure  (North  or  South);  • Fossil  fuels  are  far  more  integral  to  local  and  global  economies  than  tobacco  (both  the  revenues  and  their  use  as  a  form  of  energy),  and  are  seen  as  a  tool  for  development  by  many  countries  in  the  global  South  in  the  absence  of  external  39  support  (finance  and  technology  to  allow  for  an  alternative  development  pathway).  Therefore,  taking  these  factors  into  consideration,  the  campaign  must  not:  • Weaken  the  UNFCCC  process  itself  any  further,  due  to  its  unique  character;  • Undermine  the  wider  fight  for  equity  and  ambition  by  undermining  Southern  champions  in  an  international  space,  thereby  playing  into  the  hands  of  the  real  climate  criminals,  Northern  countries  with  historic  responsibility  and  major  fossil  fuel  interests  and  industries;71  • Be  used  as  a  campaign  against  Southern  governments  with  fossil  fuel  interests,  but  rather  empower  all  governments  to  increase  their  political  control  over  said  interests,  rather  than  allowing  them  to  set  policy;  • Make  overly-­‐strong  demands  on  the  UNFCCC  by  Paris  as  they  will  not  be  met;  instead  demands  must  build  after  Paris,  using  it  to  rebuild  momentum  after  potential  failure;  • Allow  demands  to  die  in  the  UNFCCC;  for  example  making  a  demand  of  the  COP21  Presidency  (François  Hollande)  also  contributes  to  the  French  national  campaign  and  can  continue  after;  • Exclude  groups  who  do  not  work  on  the  UNFCCC;  therefore  it  should  equally  focus  on  national  and  regional  levels  and  look  to  build  a  diverse  coalition  that  will  last  far  beyond  Paris.  71  Talking  to  Southern  climate  justice  groups,  there  is  a  view  that  they  will  hold  their  governments  to  account  in  national  spaces,  but  want  to  refrain  from  attacking  them  within  the  UNFCCC  as  this  plays  into  the  hands  of  Northern  countries  who  are  attempting  to  move  the  climate  regime  towards  an  inequitable  and  unambitious  outcome.  There  is  also  a  question  of  legitimacy,  and  Southern  groups,  aware  of  national  contexts,  should  be  leading  on  this.  How  can  we  use  COP21  in  Paris  as  an  opportunity  to  lay  the  groundwork  and  build  the  political  and  public  support  for  an  “Article  5.3“  policy  for  the  climate?  Objectives  • To  create  public  acceptance  that  the  dirty  energy  lobby  has  no  place  in  climate  policy  making  • To  have  the  dirty  energy  industry  blamed  for  the  failure  of  the  talks  due  to  their  influence  on  the  positions  and  politics  of  Northern  governments  • To  force  the  UNFCCC  to  reconsider  its  relationship  with  the  dirty  energy  lobby  • To  create  external  political  acceptance  outside  of  the  UNFCCC  that  the  dirty  energy  lobby  has  no  place  in  climate  policy  making  • To  build  a  strong,  robust  coalition  to  take  this  work  forward  after  Paris  Strategy  up  to  and  including  COP21  in  Paris  The  main  strategy  will  be  a  simple  three-­‐step  strategy:  1. Name,  shame  and  toxify  the  dirty  energy  lobby  (climate  criminals)  2. Expose/scandalise  their  close  association  with  our  political  leaders  and  climate  policy  making  (national/regional  governments  and  UNFCCC)  3. Demand  an  end  to  the  relationship  1.  Name,  shame  and  toxify  the  dirty  energy  lobby  (climate  criminals)  Choose  strategically  relevant  corporations  (depending  on  the  political  moment  –  see  below)  and  show  their  destructive  impact  (on  the  climate,  communities  and  their  environments),  their  refusal  to  take  real  action  (and  instead  promote  false  solutions,  40  which  they  benefit  from),  and  their  close  relationship  to  our  political  leaders/climate  policy  makers.  This  will  be  done  through  new  research  or  re-­‐packaging  existing  materials  (and  building  on  existing  campaigns).  Picking  well-­‐known  iconic  dirty  energy  corporations,  who  can  act  as  exemplars  for  their  industry,  makes  this  stage  far  shorter,  and  means  the  public  will  be  far  readier  to  take  the  next  step  (undermining  their  legitimacy  in  climate  policy).  • Ban  Ki-­‐moon  Summit:  the  dirtiest,  most  obvious  corporations  to  pledge  (and  those  with  the  most  contradictory  pledges  in  relation  to  their  core  business)  • COP20,  Lima:  those  operating  in  Latin  America  (new  research  will  be  produced  for  this)  • COP21,  Paris:  global,  but  relevant  for  the  French  context  • National  level:  those  relevant  to  the  struggles  of  local  groups  2.  Expose/scandalise  their  close  association  with  our  political  leaders  and  climate  policy-­‐  making  (national/regional  governments  and  UNFCCC)  This  will  be  done  through  a  simple  demand  for  transparency  around  the  interactions  between  our  political  leaders,  their  institutions  and  the  chosen  dirty  energy  corporation(s).  Such  a  demand  allows  many  groups  of  all  persuasions  to  get  behind  it,  as  well  as  being  difficult  for  a  public  institution  and  figure  to  argue  with.  It  will  be  a  dual-­‐  demand:  • Direct  interactions,  e.g.  publicly  disclosing  all  meetings  (and  minutes)  and  public  encounters  now  and  in  the  future  with  said  dirty  energy  corporation(s);  disclosing  their  funding  of  trips,  visits  or  public/private  events,  including  non-­‐  financial  contributions;  • Financial  benefits  received  by  the  corporation,  e.g.  publicly  disclosing  all  subsidies,  tax-­‐breaks,  research  funding  and  grants;  The  political  targets  will  be  at  international,  national  and  regional  level:  International  level  (UNFCCC)  To  avoid  attacking  the  process  itself,  the  campaign  could  use  public  figures  as  proxies,  who  can  be  held  up  as  the  guardians  of  the  integrity  of  the  process  and  of  climate  policy  making,  as  well  as  drivers  of  the  increasing  corporate  capture.  Demands  for  transparency  will  be  made  of:  - UNFCCC  Secretariat  (via  Christiana  Figueres,  UNFCCC  Executive-­‐Secretary):  full  disclosure  of  all  interactions  with  selected  dirty  energy  corporations  on  behalf  of  her  and  her  secretariat.  She  is  sensitive  around  maintaining  a  positive  image,  and  in  Warsaw  was  heavily  criticised  for  choosing  to  speak  at  a  coal  summit  organised  alongside  the  climate  talks,  as  well  as  choosing  it  instead  of  speaking  at  a  youth  conference  (she  was  presented  an  ultimatum).  - COP  Presidency  (via  Ollanta  Humala  and  then  François  Hollande,  Peruvian  and  French  Presidents  respectively):  full  disclosure  of  all  interactions  with  selected  dirty  energy  corporations  on  behalf  of  him  and  his  COP  Presidency  team.  Humala  is  being  heavily  criticised  for  new  regulations  in  favour  of  extractive  companies,  while  Hollande  is  championing  nuclear  energy.  - Green  Climate  Fund  (via  Héla  Cheikhrouhou,  Executive  Director):  full  disclosure  of  all  interactions  with  selected  dirty  energy  corporations  on  behalf  of  41  her,  her  staff,  GCF  board  members,  committees  and  panels.  National/Regional  level  A  campaign  tool  kit  could  be  provided  for  interested  groups  which  can  help  add  a  national-­‐level  demand  to  local  dirty  energy  struggles,  whether  in  the  global  North  or  South,  challenging  the  relationship  between  their  governments  and  their  dirty  energy  industries.72  Making  the  link  in  early  2015  with  the  trade  talks  (TTIP/TAFTA,  TPP)  would  also  allow  another  dimension  to  show  how  our  governments  are  handing  over  climate  policy  to  corporations  via  mechanisms  like  the  investor-­‐to-­‐state  dispute  settlement  mechanism  (date  tbc).  However,  to  ensure  this  campaign  compliments  the  fight  for  climate  justice  within  the  UNFCCC  negotiations  and  maintains  international  pressure  on  those  historically  responsible  for  climate  change  (who  are  preventing  us  reaching  a  just,  equitable  and  ambitious  deal),  the  campaign  coalition  will  collectively  target  specific  Northern  polluters  and  their  close  relationship  to  their  dirty  energy  industries:  - USA  - Canada  - Australia  - EU  Demands  of  transparency  regarding  the  interaction  between  these  countries  and  dirty  energy  corporations  will  be  made  at  strategic  moments  between  now  and  Paris  by  both  national-­‐level  groups  and  the  coalition,  providing  the  ammunition  to  scandalise  the  relationships  and  allow  the  third  phase.  These  72  Or  groups  who  are  fighting  for  clean-­‐energy  but  see  the  power  of  the  fossil  fuel  industry  as  blocking  them  will  also  expose  how  dirty  energy  corporations  are  influencing  the  positions  of  historic  polluters  and  preventing  a  deal.  3.  Demand  an  end  to  the  close  relationship  As  this  campaign-­‐plan  aims  to  build  public  and  political  support  for  the  need  for  a  5.3  for  climate,  an  end  to  the  relationship  before  Paris  is  unrealistic,  but  after  the  failure  of  Paris  due  to  the  dirty  energy  industry,  these  demands  will  be  taken  far  more  seriously.  Combining  the  information  revealed  in  phase  two  with  the  clear  evidence  of  how  harmful  these  dirty  energy  corporations  are  –  as  well  as  the  strong  example  of  tobacco  –  demands  for  an  end  to  the  cosy  relationship  can  be  made  at  all  levels.  These  demands  will  be  made  during  2015,  with  particular  pressure  as  the  COP21  approaches:  • UNFCCC  Secretariat  (via  Christiana  Figueres):  Her  and  her  staff  refuse  to  meet  the  dirty  energy  lobby  in  the  run-­‐up  to  COP21;  undertake  a  review  of  measures  to  protect  her  office  and  the  UNFCCC  (as  a  UN  agency)  from  the  undue  and  damaging  influence  of  the  dirty  energy  lobby  (this  includes  the  direct  involvement  of  the  dirty  energy  lobby  within  the  talks)  • COP  Presidency  (via  François  Hollande):  Him  and  his  staff  refuse  to  meet  the  dirty  energy  lobby  in  the  run-­‐up  to  COP21;  undertake  review  of  measures  to  protect  his  and  all  future  COP  Presidencies  from  the  undue  and  damaging  influence  of  the  dirty  energy  lobby  (this  covers  sponsorship  and  wider  dirty  energy  involvement)  • An  additional  demand  to  make  for  groups  working  on  the  inside  could  be  that  the  42  selected  corporations  should  simply  not  be  allowed  into  the  negotiations  (contrasting  with  the  expulsion  of  youth  delegates  at  COP19)  • The  possibility  of  a  ‘resolution’  or  some  concrete  demand  that  could  be  used  to  build  on  in  the  future  (e.g.  ‘the  COP  recognises  the  potentially  damaging  influence  of  dirty  energy  corporations  on  the  decision  making  processes  of  governments  and  the  UN  on  climate’).  TBC  • Green  Climate  Fund  (via  Héla  Cheikhrouhou):  She  and  her  staff  refuse  to  meet  the  dirty  energy  lobby;  undertake  review  of  measures  to  protect  the  GCF  from  the  undue  and  damaging  influence  of  the  dirty  energy  lobby  (this  covers  sponsorship  and  wider  dirty  energy  involvement)  • Additional  demand  for  climate  finance  groups:  the  GCF  should  not  fund  any  dirty  energy  (particularly  fossil  fuel)  projects,  while  fossil  fuel  company,  association,  or  financier/funder  cannot  fill  Private  Sector  Active  Observer  seats  nor  serve  on  GCF  panels,  committees  or  advisory  groups  The  campaign  will  also  aim  to  attract  governments  who  may  be  supportive  at  national  level  (e.g.  a  small  island  state  dependent  on  fossil  fuel  imports)  National  level  National  campaigns  should  demand  their  governments  to  a)  end  all  interactions  with  relevant  corporations  and  b)  end  all  financial  support.  However,  a  more  concrete  demand  would  be  asking  for  an  action  plan  to  show  how  they  intend  to  protect  national-­‐level  climate  policy  making  from  the  undue  and  damaging  influence  of  the  dirty  energy  industry.  However,  each  campaign  will  have  different  capacities,  needs  and  demands.  Collectively,  the  coalition  will  make  similar  demands  of  Northern  historical  polluters.  Outlined  is  just  one  option  of  how  to  deliver  such  a  campaign  and  build  public  pressure.  But  through  collective  ownership  and  a  diversity  of  strategies  and  tactics  suited  to  local  contexts,  we  will  be  able  to  end  the  cosy  relationship  between  the  dirty  energy  lobby  and  our  politicians  43  New  Movement  Strategies  Jim  Shultz  Editors’  note:  We  provide  here  three  articles  that  report  and  analyze  the  strategies  of  the  global  climate  justice  movement,  written  between  August  and  November  2014  by  Jim  Shultz,  founder  and  executive  director  of  The  Democracy  Center  and  lives  in  Cochabamba,  Bolivia.  They  are  based  in  part  on  a  much  larger  report,  “Movement  Strategies  for  Moving  Mountains:  Conversations  with  Activists  Worldwide  on  How  to  Use  Latin  America’s  COP  to  Build  Citizen  Action  on  Climate,”  prepared  by  The  Democracy  Center.  We  are  grateful  to  Jim,  The  Democracy  Center,  Yes!  Magazine  Climate  Comeback:  A  Grassroots  Movement  Steps  Back  Into  the  International  Arena  Three  major  international  meetings  about  climate  change  are  on  the  horizon.  Is  this  the  moment  to  fix  the  failures  of  Copenhagen?  Jim  Shultz  August  26,  2014    comeback-­‐international-­‐arena  A  roof  in  New  York  City  shows  a  map  of  the  five  boroughs  after  a  rise  in  sea  levels.  Photo  by  Molly  Dilworth  /  Flickr.  The  citizens’  movement  for  action  on  the  global  climate  crisis  has,  over  time,  developed  a  love-­‐hate  relationship  with  international  campaigning.  For  years,  people  from  all  over  the  planet  have  joined  together  across  national  boundaries  to  address  a  crisis  that  knows  no  such  boundaries.  The  climate  movement  is  stepping  back  into  the  international  arena  once  again  The  vision  they  created  had  an  appeal  that  was  both  romantic  and  strategic  at  the  same  time.  The  high  point  for  this  “one  planet,  one  people”  activism  was  in  2009,  when  activists  descended  on  the  Danish  capital  of  Copenhagen  by  the  tens  of  thousands  to  push  for  action  at  the  U.N.’s  annual  COP  (Conference  of  the  Parties)  summit,  with  hopes  for  a  global  deal  as  serious  and  real  as  the  climate  threat  itself  (some  activists  dubbed  the  meeting  “Hopenhagen”).  Those  activist  hopes  crashed,  however,  against  the  unchanged  political  realities  of  narrow  national  interest,  powerful  corporate  resistance,  complex  issues,  and  a  lack  of  political  will.  Many  climate  campaigners  reacted  by  returning  to  their  countries  and  focusing  their  energies  instead  on  political  battles  closer  to  home,  such  as  the  fight  over  the  Keystone  XL  pipeline  in  the  U.S.  and  anti-­‐  fracking  efforts  in  Europe.  By  the  time  the  most  recent  COP  negotiations  were  held  in  Warsaw  last  December,  the  process  had  become  almost  completely  ignored  by  the  larger  public.  Now,  in  a  three-­‐step  dance  that  begins  on  the  streets  of  New  York  City  in  September,  the  climate  movement  is  stepping  back  into  the  international  arena  once  again.  United  Nations  Secretary  General  Ban  Ki-­‐Moon,  who  has  made  climate  change  a  main  issue  of  his  44  tenure,  has  called  the  planet’s  heads  of  state  and  other  “world  leaders”  to  a  special  “Climate  Week”  summit  aimed  at  increasing  the  pressure  for  coordinated  international  action.  Knowing  what  you  want  and  knowing  how  to  change  the  political  equation  are  two  different  things.  Climate  advocacy  organizations  in  the  U.S.  have  been  mobilizing  for  months  to  seize  the  opportunity  with  plans  for  a  massive  march  through  the  streets  of  Manhattan  on  September  21.  In  December,  this  renewed  energy  for  international  action  will  turn  southward  to  Peru,  where  the  COP  negotiations  will  convene  in  the  political  shadow  of  melting  Andean  glaciers.  Then  in  December  of  next  year  the  COP  negotiations  will  move  to  Paris  for  what  is  supposed  to  be  the  deadline  for  a  new  international  climate  accord.  European  activists  are  already  meeting  to  organize  a  mobilization  in  the  streets  there  to  match  or  surpass  the  multitude  expected  in  New  York  next  month.  As  the  climate  movement  steps  forward  once  again  into  the  arena  of  international  politics,  it  suffers  no  shortage  of  demands  and  proposals.  Climate  groups  can  offer  up  a  diversity  of  ambitious  and  passionate  plans  for  how  to  reduce  humanity’s  use  of  fossil  fuels,  protect  the  world’s  forests,  and  move  money  from  the  rich  countries  that  have  caused  the  crisis  to  the  poor  ones  least  equipped  to  deal  with  what’s  coming.  But  knowing  what  you  want  and  knowing  how  to  change  the  political  equation  to  make  that  possible  are  two  different  things.  The  Democracy  Center  recently  interviewed  more  than  40  key  climate  activists  from  across  five  continents  to  seek  their  views  on  how  to  use  the  Lima  summit  and  these  other  global  gatherings  as  an  opportunity  to  alter  the  political  winds  around  the  climate  crisis  and  make  real  action  more  possible.  What  we  heard,  from  people  ranging  from  local  indigenous  activists  to  staff  at  well-­‐known  NGOs,  were  three  important  strands  of  collective  wisdom.  First,  change  the  global  narrative  about  the  climate  crisis.  Climate  activists  have  bounced  for  a  decade  from  one  way  of  talking  about  the  crisis  to  another.  We  have  heard  about  polar  bears  and  sea  rise,  mutant  storms  and  parts  per  billion  of  carbon  in  the  atmosphere  –  none  of  it  sufficiently  connected  to  people’s  daily  lives  to  gain  hard  and  lasting  traction.  But  there  are  lessons  from  the  grassroots  about  how  to  do  better.  In  California,  climate  activists  successfully  fought  back  a  political  assault  by  the  Koch  brothers  by  talking  about  local  fossil  fuel  plants  and  their  connection  to  asthma  among  children.  In  South  America  the  crisis  is  about  water  –  the  disappearance  of  it  in  some  places  causing  drought  and  displacement,  and  too  much  of  it  in  other  places  causing  flooding  and  destruction.  In  Asia  and  Africa,  people  talk  about  climate’s  role  in  a  worsening  food  crisis.  Getting  real  action  on  climate  is  about  political  power.  The  common  thread  in  the  messages  that  are  winning  support  is  to  speak  locally  and  connect  the  climate  crisis  to  real  issues  of  life,  survival,  and  the  diminished  and  more  dangerous  planet  we  are  getting  ready  to  leave  to  our  children  and  theirs.  Just  as  important  as  the  message  is  the  moral  authority  of  those  who  deliver  it.  “We  can’t  talk  about  the  impacts  unless  the  main  45  message  comes  from  the  affected  communities,”  says  Juan  Carlos  Soriano,  a  Peruvian  activist  with  350.org.  Second,  use  this  trilogy  of  global  actions  to  build  the  long-­‐term  power  of  the  climate  movement.  Getting  real  action  on  climate  is  not  just  about  raising  consciousness;  it  is  about  political  power  and  how  the  climate  movement  can  build  muscle.  In  New  York  and  Paris  the  focus  will  be  on  getting  multitudes  into  the  streets  in  the  hope  of  convincing  governments  that  they  ignore  a  rising  demand  for  action  at  their  political  peril.  “What  we  most  need  to  do  as  a  movement  is  move  the  conversation  and  build  power,  not  lobby  global  leaders,”  observes  Sean  Sweeney  of  the  Global  Labor  Institute.  In  Latin  America,  Africa,  and  Asia  that  citizen  power  resides  in  long-­‐established  movements  on  the  ground  tied  to  indigenous  rights,  territorial  rights,  natural  resources,  and  other  battles  that  are  now  impacted  by  climate  change.  Sandwiched  in  between  the  higher  profile,  Northern-­‐dominated  events  in  New  York  and  Paris,  activists  we  spoke  with  said  that  the  COP  in  Lima  must  stand  out  as  the  “COP  of  the  South”  and  make  the  link  between  the  climate  crisis  and  these  movements.  “The  local  struggles  seem  to  be  in  compartmentalized  spaces  that  don’t  connect  to  this  big  issue  that  affects  absolutely  everything.  One  of  the  challenges  is  to  connect  the  local  struggles  and  demands  with  activism  on  climate  change,”  says  Elizabeth  Peredo  Beltran,  a  well-­‐regarded  climate  leader  in  Bolivia.  The  path  through  New  York,  Lima,  and  Paris  offers  a  chance  to  engage  new  communities.  Third,  directly  confront  the  powers  and  forces  blocking  serious  action  on  the  climate  crisis.  Fossil  fuel  companies,  international  agribusiness,  automobile  manufacturers,  and  other  corporate  interests  have  a  huge  stake  in  international  climate  negotiations  and  have  used  their  political  muscle  to  embed  themselves  in  the  U.N.’s  COP  process.  During  the  meeting  in  Warsaw  last  year,  the  Corporate  Europe  Observatory  documented  all  kinds  of  techniques  used  by  these  corporations  to  become  official  sponsors  of  global  climate  negotiations  the  way  they  might  make  themselves  sponsors  of  the  Olympics  or  World  Cup.  Corporations  furnished  government  negotiators  with  everything  from  free  cars  and  drivers  to  logo-­‐  emblazoned  drinking  cups,  all  the  while  pushing  their  agendas  on  issues  such  as  coal  capture  technology  and  corporate-­‐driven  carbon  markets.  Activists  say  it  is  urgent  to  put  a  spotlight  on  this  corporate  capture  of  the  negotiations  and  on  the  false  solutions  corporations  have  used  their  access  to  promote.  “We  need  to  go  in  with  an  offensive  strategy  and  communicate  the  message  that  the  negotiations  are  focusing  on  the  wrong  issues  –  the  real  solutions  are  about  redesigning  the  economy,”  says  Nathan  Thanki  of  the  European  group  Earth  in  Brackets.  Sun  Tzu  wrote  in  The  Art  of  War  that  “strategy  without  tactics  is  the  slowest  route  to  victory  and  tactics  without  strategy  is  the  noise  before  defeat.”  It  is  good  news  in  the  world  of  climate  activism  that  movements  and  organizations  are  taking  up  anew  the  46  demand  for  serious  action  at  the  international  level.  While  it  is  highly  doubtful  that  countries  like  the  U.S.,  China,  India,  and  others  would  ever  bind  their  domestic  policies  to  a  global  agreement,  international  action  can  increase  the  pressure  on  these  governments  to  act.  As  with  all  successful  citizen  movements,  that  begins  with  building  a  solid,  committed,  and  mobilized  base  among  those  already  committed  to  action.  But  the  climate  movement  must  also  win  support  from  the  corners  of  citizenry  that  are  not  yet  engaged  and  not  yet  persuaded  behind  a  common  agenda  for  what  needs  to  be  done.  The  path  through  New  York,  Lima,  and  Paris  offers  a  chance  to  do  that  –  if  we  speak  about  the  crisis  in  a  way  that  connects  with  people,  if  we  use  every  opportunity  to  gather  as  a  chance  to  build  power  and  not  just  blow  off  steam,  and  if  we  unmask,  challenge,  and  undermine  the  larger  forces  that  stand  in  the  way.  With  so  much  at  stake  for  the  generations  who  will  follow  us  on  this  planet,  it  is  essential  that  the  next  round  of  global  climate  action  be  something  far  more  than  just  “the  noise  before  defeat.”  International  Climate  Activism:  The  Second  Coming  Jim  Shultz  August  29,  2014    climate-­‐activism-­‐the-­‐second-­‐coming/  The  Democracy  Center  has  just  released  our  report  on  the  first  phase  of  a  project  looking  at  the  opportunities  which  renewed  energy  in  international  negotiations  –  and  renewed  activist  energies  –  can  provide  for  strategy-­‐  building  within  the  climate  movement.  A  version  of  this  article  was  also  published  in  Yes!  Magazine  The  citizen  movement  for  action  on  the  global  climate  crisis  has,  over  time,  developed  a  love-­‐hate  relationship  with  international  campaigning.  For  years  the  vision  of  people  from  all  over  the  planet  joining  together  across  national  boundaries  to  address  a  crisis  that  knows  no  such  boundaries  had  an  appeal  that  was  both  romantic  and  strategic  at  the  same  time.  The  high  point  for  this  ‘one  planet,  one  people’  activism  was  in  2009  in  Copenhagen  when  activists  descended  on  the  Danish  capital  by  the  tens  of  thousands  to  push  for  action  at  the  UN’s  annual  COP  (Conference  of  the  Parties)  summit,  with  hopes  for  a  global  deal  as  serious  and  real  as  the  climate  threat  (some  activists  dubbed  the  meeting  “Hopenhagen”).  Demonstrators  against  the  Keystone  XL  pipeline  in  front  of  the  White  House  47  Those  activist  hopes  crashed,  however,  against  the  unchanged  political  realities  of  narrow  national  interest,  powerful  corporate  resistance,  complex  issues,  and  a  lack  of  political  will.  Many  climate  campaigners  reacted  by  returning  to  their  countries  and  focusing  their  energies  instead  on  political  battles  closer  to  home,  such  as  the  fight  over  the  Keystone  pipeline  in  the  U.S.  and  anti-­‐  fracking  efforts  in  Europe.  By  the  time  the  most  recent  COP  negotiations  were  held  in  Warsaw  last  December,  the  process  had  become  almost  completely  ignored  by  the  larger  public.  Now,  in  a  three-­‐step  dance  that  begins  on  the  streets  of  New  York  in  September,  the  climate  movement  is  stepping  hard  back  into  the  international  arena  once  again.  UN  Secretary  General  Ban  Ki-­‐moon,  who  has  made  climate  change  a  main  issue  of  his  tenure,  has  called  the  planet’s  heads  of  state  and  other  “world  leaders”  to  a  special  Climate  Week  summit  aimed  at  increasing  the  pressure  for  coordinated  international  action.  Climate  advocacy  organizations  in  the  U.S.  have  been  mobilizing  for  months  to  seize  the  opportunity  with  plans  for  a  massive  march  through  the  streets  of  Manhattan  on  September  21.  In  December  this  renewed  energy  for  international  action  will  turn  southward  to  Peru,  where  the  COP  negotiations  will  convene  in  the  political  shadow  of  melting  Andean  glaciers.  Then  in  December  of  next  year  the  COP  negotiations  will  move  to  Paris  for  what  is  supposed  to  be  the  deadline  for  a  new  international  climate  accord.  European  activists  are  already  meeting  to  organize  a  mobilization  in  the  streets  there  to  match  or  surpass  the  multitude  expected  in  at  the  UN  next  month.  As  the  climate  movement  steps  forward  once  again  into  the  arena  of  international  politics  it  suffers  no  shortage  of  demands  and  proposals.  Climate  groups  can  offer  up  a  diversity  of  ambitious  and  passionate  plans  for  how  to  reduce  humanity’s  use  of  fossil  fuels,  protect  the  world’s  forests,  and  move  money  from  the  rich  countries  that  have  caused  the  crisis  to  the  poor  ones  least  equipped  to  deal  with  what’s  coming.  But  knowing  what  you  want  and  knowing  how  to  change  the  political  equation  to  make  that  possible  are  two  different  things.  The  Democracy  Center  recently  interviewed  more  than  forty  key  climate  activists  from  across  five  continents  to  seek  their  views  on  how  to  use  the  Lima  summit  and  these  other  global  gatherings  as  an  opportunity  to  alter  the  political  winds  around  the  climate  crisis  and  make  real  action  more  possible.  What  we  heard,  from  people  ranging  from  local  indigenous  activists  to  staff  at  well-­‐known  NGOs,  were  three  important  strands  of  collective  wisdom.  First,  change  the  global  narrative  about  the  climate  crisis.  Climate  activists  have  bounced  for  a  decade  from  one  way  of  talking  about  the  crisis  to  another.  We  have  heard  about  polar  bears  and  sea  rise,  mutant  storms  and  parts  per  billion  of  carbon  in  the  atmosphere,  48  none  of  it  sufficiently  connected  to  people’s  daily  lives  to  gain  hard  and  lasting  traction.  But  there  are  lessons  from  the  grassroots  about  how  to  do  better.  In  California,  climate  activists  successfully  fought  back  a  political  assault  by  the  Koch  brothers  by  talking  about  local  fossil  fuel  plants  and  their  connection  to  child  asthma.  In  South  America  the  crisis  is  about  water  –  the  disappearance  of  it  in  some  places  causing  drought  and  displacement,  and  too  much  of  it  in  other  places  causing  flooding  and  destruction.  In  Asia  and  Africa  people  talk  about  climate’s  role  in  a  worsening  food  crisis.  The  common  thread  in  the  messages  that  are  winning  support  is  to  speak  locally  and  connect  the  climate  crisis  to  real  issues  of  life,  survival,  and  the  diminished  and  more  dangerous  planet  we  are  getting  ready  to  leave  to  our  children  and  theirs.  Just  as  important  as  the  message  is  the  moral  authority  of  those  who  deliver  it.  “We  can’t  talk  about  the  impacts  unless  the  main  message  comes  from  the  affected  communities,”  says  Juan  Carlos  Soriano,  a  Peruvian  activist  with  350.org.  Second,  use  this  trilogy  of  global  actions  to  build  the  long-­‐term  power  of  the  climate  movement.  Getting  real  action  on  climate  is  not  just  about  raising  consciousness,  it  is  about  political  power  and  how  the  climate  movement  can  build  muscle.  In  New  York  and  Paris  the  focus  will  be  on  getting  multitudes  into  the  streets  in  the  hope  of  convincing  governments  that  they  ignore  a  rising  demand  for  action  at  their  political  peril.  “What  we  most  need  to  do  as  a  movement  is  move  the  conversation  and  build  power,  not  lobby  global  leaders,”  observes  Sean  Sweeney  of  the  Global  Labor  Institute.  In  Latin  America,  Africa  and  Asia  that  citizen  power  resides  in  long-­‐established  movements  on  the  ground  tied  to  indigenous  rights,  territorial  rights,  natural  resources,  and  other  battles  that  are  now  impacted  by  climate  change.  Sandwiched  in  between  the  higher  profile,  Northern-­‐dominated  events  in  New  York  and  Paris,  activists  we  spoke  with  said  that  the  COP  in  Lima  must  stand  out  as  the  ‘COP  of  the  South’  and  make  the  link  between  the  climate  crisis  and  these  movements.  “The  local  struggles  seem  to  be  in  compartmentalized  spaces  that  don’t  connect  to  this  big  issue  that  affects  absolutely  everything.  One  of  the  challenges  is  to  connect  the  local  struggles  and  demands  with  activism  on  climate  change,”  says  Elizabeth  Peredo  Beltran,  a  well-­‐regarded  climate  leader  in  Bolivia.  Third,  directly  confront  the  powers  and  forces  blocking  serious  action  on  the  climate  crisis.  Fossil  fuel  companies,  international  agribusiness,  car  makers  and  other  corporate  interests  have  a  huge  stake  in  international  climate  negotiations  and  have  used  their  political  muscle  to  embed  themselves  in  the  UN’s  COP  negotiations  process.  During  the  COP  meeting  in  Warsaw  last  year  the  Corporate  Europe  Observatory  documented  all  kinds  of  techniques  used  by  these  corporations  to  become  official  sponsors  of  global  climate  negotiations  the  way  they  might  make  themselves  official  sponsors  of  the  Olympics  or  World  Cup.  Corporations  furnished  government  negotiators  with  everything  from  free  cars  and  drivers  to  logo-­‐  emblazoned  drinking  cups,  all  the  while  pushing  their  agendas  on  issues  such  as  coal  capture  technology  and  corporate-­‐driven  carbon  markets.  Activists  say  it  is  urgent  to  put  a  spotlight  on  this  corporate  capture  of  the  UN  negotiations  and  on  the  false  solutions  being  promoted  by  these  corporations  using  the  access  they’ve  gained.  “We  need  to  go  in  with  an  offensive  strategy  and  communicate  the  message  that  the  negotiations  are  focusing  on  the  wrong  issues  49  –  the  real  solutions  are  about  redesigning  the  economy,”  says  Nathan  Thanki  of  the  European  group,  Earth  in  Brackets.  Sun  Tzu  wrote  in  ‘The  Art  of  War’,  “Strategy  without  tactics  is  the  slowest  route  to  victory  and  tactics  without  strategy  is  the  noise  before  defeat.”  It  is  good  news  in  the  world  of  climate  activism  that  movements  and  organizations  are  taking  up  anew  the  demand  for  serious  action  at  the  international  level.  While  it  is  highly  doubtful  that  countries  like  the  U.S.,  China,  India  and  others  would  ever  bind  their  domestic  policies  to  a  global  agreement;  international  action  can  increase  the  pressure  on  these  governments  to  act.  As  with  all  successful  citizen  movements,  that  begins  with  building  a  solid,  committed,  and  mobilized  base  among  those  already  committed  to  action,  a  based  being  mobilized  now  into  the  streets.  But  the  climate  movement  must  also  win  support  from  the  corners  of  citizenry  that  are  not  yet  engaged  and  not  yet  persuaded  behind  a  common  agenda  for  what  needs  to  be  done.  The  path  through  New  York,  Lima  and  Paris  offers  a  chance  to  do  that  –  if  we  speak  about  the  crisis  in  a  way  that  connects  with  people,  if  we  use  every  opportunity  to  gather  as  a  chance  to  build  power  and  not  just  blow  off  steam,  and  if  we  unmask,  challenge,  and  undermine  the  larger  forces  that  stand  in  the  way.  With  so  much  at  stake  for  the  generations  who  will  follow  us  on  this  planet,  it  is  essential  that  the  next  round  of  global  climate  action  be  something  far  more  than  just  “the  noise  before  defeat.”  Time  for  a  New  Containment  Strategy?  What  Climate  Marchers  Can  Learn  from  the  Cold  War  Jim  Shultz  September  29,  2014    hands/time-­‐for-­‐a-­‐new-­‐containment-­‐strategy-­‐  what-­‐the-­‐climate-­‐movement-­‐cold-­‐war  The  leading  strategies  in  the  climate  justice  movement  already  resemble  the  Cold  War  policies  of  containment,  roll-­‐back,  and  isolation.  But  can  they  wear  down  the  political  power  of  the  fossil  fuel  industry?  This  story  is  part  of  the  Climate  In  Our  Hands  collaboration  between  Truthout  and  YES!  Magazine.  More  than  400,000  people  jammed  the  streets  of  Manhattan  on  September  21,  drawn  from  all  parts  by  the  magnetic  force  of  the  People’s  Climate  March.  From  Times  At  the  People's  Climate  March  in  New  York  City.  Photo  by  Stephen  D.  Melkisethian  /  Flickr.  Square  to  the  upper  reaches  of  Central  Park  West,  a  40-­‐block  sea  of  humanity  joined  under  banners  that  demanded  action,  named  the  responsible,  and  articulated  the  solutions.  Most  moving  of  all  were  those  that  expressed  the  fears  and  hopes  of  the  children  who  drew  50  and  carried  them.  For  those  fortunate  enough  to  be  there,  it  was  a  deeply  empowering  experience.  The  People’s  March  was  not  about  demands  that  lacked  the  power  to  force  action.  That  said,  Climate  Week  in  New  York  –  the  march,  the  special  U.N.  summit  that  catalyzed  it,  and  the  swirl  of  side  events  surrounding  both  –  was  about  far  more  than  a  one-­‐time  gathering  of  the  masses.  Its  true  value  lay  in  the  millions  of  conversations  it  spawned  among  the  citizens  who  committed  their  presence  to  the  battle.  Some  of  these  conversations  came  in  organized  forums  but  most  were  spontaneous,  between  strangers  on  the  street  or  old  friends  reunited  around  a  table.  It  was  in  these  conversations  that  people  dug  for  deeper  insight  into  the  challenge  we  face  and  where  we  go  now  as  a  movement.  Many  of  those  conversations  were  about  hope.  Just  hours  off  my  long  plane  ride  to  New  York  from  Bolivia,  I  stood  before  an  auditorium  of  students  at  Brooklyn  College,  young  people  who  spoke  of  the  future  with  fear  and  concern.  Many  of  them  had  their  introduction  to  the  climate  issue  during  Hurricane  Sandy,  an  experience  of  vulnerability  still  fresh  in  their  minds.  Finding  hope  may  be  more  essential  on  climate  than  on  any  other  crisis  we  face.  War,  genocide,  disease,  and  injustice  –  dire  as  they  are  –  have  “off  switches”  that  history  has  shown  us  before.  Barbarians  fall,  governments  make  peace,  vaccines  are  discovered.  We  don’t  know  if  the  climate  crisis  has  an  off  switch,  even  if  we  do  muster  powerful  global  citizen  action.  “Let’s  be  honest,”  said  a  woman  in  the  audience  at  one  of  the  forums  where  I  spoke.  “It  is  OK  for  us  to  be  here  just  to  recharge  our  batteries  for  the  battles  ahead.”  A  basic  principle  that  is  both  big  enough  to  make  a  difference  and  simple  to  understand:  “Leave  it  in  the  ground.”  I  saw  that  hope  over  and  over  again  in  small  ways:  in  Christina,  the  young  muralist  I  met  on  a  corner  in  SoHo,  painting  a  banner  for  the  march.  I  saw  it  in  Raymond,  an  engineer  from  Alaska  who  flew  to  New  York  to  participate  in  the  first  political  action  of  his  life.  “It  seemed  like  an  opportunity  to  do  something,”  he  told  me.  In  our  large  numbers,  we  saw  glimpses  of  a  people  rising  and  we  need  that.  But  there  were  many,  many  other  conversations  about  what  must  come  after  the  March,  about  goals,  power,  tactics,  and  the  missing  connection  between  each  of  those:  strategy.  I  heard  familiar  criticisms  of  the  March.  Michael  Dorsey,  a  20-­‐year  veteran  of  U.N.  and  NGO  work  who  spoke  on  a  panel  alongside  me,  chastised  350.org  leader  Bill  McKibben  as  he  listened  to  us,  saying  the  weekend’s  action  lacked  a  clear  message  beyond  “Do  something!”  “Brother  Bill,”  he  said,  “I  will  not  march  with  you  tomorrow.  I  will  not  join  in  a  march  that  has  no  demands.”  But  the  People’s  Climate  March  was  not  about  demands  that  lacked  the  power  to  force  action.  It  was  about  building  a  base  for  action  wide  enough  to  connect  Brooklyn  families  pushing  strollers  to  the  anti-­‐  51  capitalists  who  got  arrested  at  Flood  Wall  Street  the  next  day.  I  have  been  in  gatherings  like  this  one  before:  the  People’s  Climate  Summit  in  Bolivia  in  2010;  the  activist  assembly  at  Rio  20  in  2012;  and  others.  I  am  continually  amazed  at  the  energy  invested  –  and  wasted  –  in  these  spaces  as  the  movement’s  intellectuals  polish  theories  that  no  one  outside  the  movement  understands;  as  the  various  coalitions  polish  their  passionate  declarations  that  no  one  will  read.  Absent  always  is  genuine  debate  about  how  we  make  any  of  it  actually  happen.  And  in  this  way  the  debates  around  the  People’s  Climate  March  seemed,  for  the  most  part,  no  different.  Finding  hope  may  be  more  essential  on  climate  than  on  any  other  crisis  we  face.  On  Sunday  evening  people  gathered  in  gaggles  to  take  stock  of  what  they  had  just  been  a  part  of.  I  had  the  fortune  to  have  that  after-­‐march  conversation  over  Chinese  take-­‐  out  in  the  Harlem  apartment  of  someone  who  has  written  extensively  about  these  kinds  of  questions  for  many  decades:  City  University  of  New  York  professor  Frances  Fox  Piven.  An  avid  scholar  of  (and  participant  in)  people’s  movements  since  the  1960s,  Piven  listened  and  then  offered  a  simple  truth  that  has  run  through  every  key  social  movement  of  the  past  hundred  years:  Persuasion  through  words  is  not  enough.  We  have  to  find  the  levers  of  real  power,  and  then  reach  and  seize  them.  Marching  en  masse  alongside  Central  Park  and  blocking  lower  Broadway  the  next  day  may  have  raised  our  voices,  but  it  brought  neither  shudders  nor  changes  of  course  on  Wall  Street  or  in  the  U.N.  assembly.  But  among  the  many  who  gathered  in  New  York  this  past  week,  among  the  activists  who  carry  the  fight  forward,  there  is  a  good  deal  of  solid  thinking  about  how  we  move  from  inspiration  to  real  strategy.  Around  the  world,  there  is  a  gathering  around  a  basic  principle  that  is  both  big  enough  to  make  a  difference  and  simple  to  understand:  “Leave  the  oil,  gas,  and  coal  in  the  ground.”  Over  cheap  Mexican  food  at  a  sticky  table  in  Brooklyn,  I  listened  to  my  old  friend  and  fearless  activist  Antonia  Juhasz.  She  began  battling  the  oil  industry  years  before  the  practice  came  into  vogue,  writing  widely  read  books  and  getting  arrested  at  a  Chevron  shareholder  meeting  in  Texas.  She  had  just  returned  from  a  submarine  trip  to  the  bottom  of  the  Gulf  of  Mexico  to  witness  the  destruction  of  the  sea  floor  wrought  by  BP’s  spilled  oil.  As  she  spoke  about  the  People’s  Climate  March,  I  began  to  recognize  a  strategy  that  was  old  and  familiar:  containment.  For  five  decades,  this  was  the  geopolitical  strategy  that  the  U.S.  aimed  at  Soviet  Communism  –  don’t  let  it  spread,  roll  it  back  where  you  can,  and  support  those  actions  that  will  hasten  it  collapsing  of  its  own  weight.  Even  if  we  have  not  articulated  it  as  such,  that  is  our  strategy  today  against  the  threat  of  fossil  fuels.  The  battles  against  fracking  are  about  containing  the  spread  of  the  drilling.  The  battles  against  existing  coal  plants  are  about  rolling  it  back.  The  battles  for  divestment  are  aimed  at  making  the  industry  52  a  political  pariah,  akin  to  tobacco,  to  diminish  its  political  clout.  The  hope  is  that  the  move  toward  energy  and  transportation  alternatives,  combined  with  divestment,  will  loosen  fossil  fuels’  grip  over  the  political  and  economic  territory  the  industry  holds  now,  and  hasten  its  collapse.  The  march’s  true  value  lay  in  the  millions  of  conversations  it  spawned.  We  also  know  that  our  political  clout  against  the  industry  is  strongest  closest  to  our  communities,  and  that  those  are  the  battlefields  we  must  drag  the  fight  to.  Victories  against  the  Koch  brothers  in  California,  against  fracking  efforts  in  New  York,  and  others  show  us  what  strategy  and  victory  look  like.  As  I  stood  in  the  crowd  during  the  march,  I  heard  a  chorus  of  unfamiliar  voices  chanting  my  name.  “Hey  Jim,  we  came,  we  came!”  A  group  of  the  students  I  had  spoken  to  days  earlier  at  Brooklyn  College  had  heeded  my  pleas  and  had  given  up  their  precious  Sunday  to  join  the  march.  They  were  all  smiles  as  they  walked.  This  is  where  hope  comes  from.  This  is  what  the  People’s  Climate  March  was  really  about.  Now  we  must  make  sure  that  the  march  does  not  end  on  Eleventh  Avenue,  where  we  all  went  our  separate  ways,  but  that  it  continues  on  across  continents  and  countries  in  a  way  that  can  go  beyond  talking  about  our  fears,  demands,  and  dreams  to  also  make  a  serious  difference.  53  Integrate  and  Escalate  Nathan  Thanki  What  strategies  and  tactics  should  the  climate  justice  movement  adopt,  both  inside  and  outside  the  U.N.  negotiations  (known  as  the  COP,  or  Conference  of  the  Parties),  to  create  maximum  pushback  against  the  status  quo  of  unfettered  carbon-­‐fuelled  capitalism,  and  to  ensure  that  the  United  Nations'  next  universal  climate  treaty,  to  be  adopted  at  the  COP  21  Paris  talks  in  December  2015,  leads  the  world  away  from  its  current  destination  of  global  climate  apartheid  and  toward  climate  justice?  These  are  not  new  questions  and  neither  are  my  answers.  I  don’t  assume  to  have  the  experience  or  intelligence  to  be  able  to  outline  any  grand  strategies  to  achieve  climate  justice,  but  I  will  humbly  offer  some  ideas  (the  list  is  definitely  not  exhaustive)  that  may  contribute  to  getting  us  on  the  way.  Integrate  and  escalate  with  other  struggles  For  being  such  a  cross-­‐cutting  issue,  climate  change  is  oddly  isolated  and  most  of  the  people  from  mainstream  groups  that  self-­‐  identify  as  being  part  of  a  climate  [justice]  movement  have  become  stranded  in  the  increasingly  apolitical,  click-­‐bait  work  of  online  “communications,”  or  in  the  obscure  depths  of  national  or  international  policy.  I  don’t  say  this  to  denigrate  this  work  –  it  is  essential  and  somebody  must  do  it  –  but  just  to  question  if  the  compartmentalization  of  activism  and  further  specialization  within  climate  change  activism  has  led  us  to  lose  sight  of  the  bigger  picture.  One  thing  many  who  organize  around  climate  change  have  pointed  out  is  that  apart  from  during  extreme  weather  events,  it  is  very  hard  to  make  climate  change  (the  abstract  concept)  real  for  people  in  a  way  that  will  radicalize  and  mobilize  them.  We  need  to  ask:  what  issues  do  radicalize  and  mobilize  people?  Of  those  issues,  which  ones  are  really  the  same  fight  as  the  climate  fight,  and  which  ones  are  struggles  in  need  of  solidarity  and  support?  In  my  mind,  the  best  way  forward  for  the  climate  movement  is  to  connect  with  the  struggles  that  matter  to  people:  land,  food,  energy,  extraction,  water,  health,  transport,  development,  or  some  combination  of  many  issues.  This  doesn’t  mean  adopting  the  bad-­‐ally  habits  of  doing  things  like  showing  up  at  Ferguson  shouting  about  climate  change.73  Nobody  wants  that.  That  isn’t  helpful.  What  it  does  means  is  a  lot  of  hard,  humble,  solidarity  work.  Many  groups  are  of  course  already  doing  this  and  more  connections  between  struggles  are  being  made  every  day  –  my  point  is  that  this  needs  to  become  the  norm  rather  than  the  exception.  At  least  in  the  English-­‐speaking  world,  the  Right  have  gained  so  much  ground  in  recent  years.  A  climate  [justice]  movement  that  doesn’t  recognize  this  as  a  major  problem  and  work  to  push  back  against  a  common  enemy  will  fail  to  achieve  any  of  its  objectives.  Use  diversity  as  strength  Part  of  the  reason  that  right-­‐wing  ideology  has  taken  over  the  mainstream  is  that  while  it  presents  a  broadly  united  front,  the  left  is  utterly  fractured.  That’s  not  news  to  anyone,  I  know,  but  then  why  do  we  remain  so?  Stuart  Hall  talked  about  the  need  to  foster  an  ability  to  live  with  difference.  To  work  together  through  our  differences  for  a  common  cause.  We  seem  to  be  finding  that  difficult.  Instead  of  building  our  counter-­‐cultures  and  constructing  a  new  cultural  hegemony  (that  is  negotiated)  we  are  caught  in  a  cycle  of  73  Just  want  to  be  really  clear  that  Deirdre  Smith’s  piece  for  350  was  a  really  good  articulation  of  how  racism  and  climate  justice  are  connected.  It  can  be  done,  but  doing  it  wrong  is  worse  than  not  trying  at  all.  54  imperialistic  activism  forcing  groups  to  maintain  at  all  costs  their  independence  to  such  an  extent  that  a  common  platform  or  agenda  becomes  impossible.  Why,  for  example,  do  we  spend  a  lot  of  time  dismissing  each  other’s  work?  Why  is  US  organizing  culture  the  dominant  one?  Among  groups  that  do  climate  justice  work  there  are  many  approaches,  but  sadly  rather  than  treating,  for  example,  Keystone,  the  WTO,  GMOs,  the  Green  Climate  Fund  and  fracking  as  different  fronts  of  the  same  war  we  treat  them  as  unrelated  or  competing  projects.  That’s  not  to  say  we  shouldn’t  recognize  the  different  utility  of  each  to  movement  building  (most  people  are  turned  on  by  stopping  a  new  extractive  project  rather  than  by  incremental  gains  in  international  law)  just  that  we  should  treat  them  all  as  part  of  the  same  overall  struggle.  Be  pragmatic  and  idealistic  at  the  same  time  In  spite  of  all  the  cynicism,  I  actually  think  many  activists  are  highly  idealistic.  To  the  point  of  it  being  a  burden  on  them,  their  work,  and  any  hopes  of  building  a  popular  movement  for  climate  justice.  If  we’re  to  have  any  hope  of  doing  that,  we’ll  need  to  leave  behind  some  of  our  notions  of  ideological  purity.  At  the  very  least  we  need  to  envision  the  way  forward  to  achieving  our  objectives  –  including  all  the  milestones  to  getting  there.  For  example,  the  People’s  Climate  March  in  September  2014  was  not  perfect.  I  think  everyone  centrally  involved  would  freely  admit  that.  But  some  of  the  public  criticism  of  the  mobilization  was  totally  unhelpful  –  especially  as  it  came  merely  days  beforehand  and  from  people  who  had  not  tried  to  collaborate  with  the  organizers  in  order  to  better  the  message/route/whatever  else  they  had  issue  with  in  the  preceding  months.  The  final  word  was  that  400,000  were  on  the  streets  of  New  York  for  climate  change.  Some  of  them  lacked  a  sharp  analysis  about  the  root  causes  of  the  crisis,  but  I  saw  many  people  who  were  clearly  protesting  neoliberal  capitalism.  You  can  have  all  the  analysis  you  like  and  spend  all  your  time  cynically  blogging  away,  but  unless  you’re  actually  doing  something  in  the  real  world  as  well,  you  appear  to  me  to  be  an  attention  seeker  more  concerned  with  their  own  ego  than  with  actually  building  bridges  and  the  type  of  movements  needed.  In  my  mind,  there’s  no  contradiction  in  having  ideals  that  are  not  lived  up  to  but  which  you  constantly  strive  for.  The  old  chestnut  “don’t  let  the  perfect  be  the  enemy  of  the  good”  rings  true.  Get  over  the  EGO  and  NGO  politics  As  mentioned,  a  huge  drag  on  movement  building  is  the  prevalence  of  some  massive  egos  and  the  persistence  of  NGO  in-­‐fighting  over  brand  recognition  and  funding.  Of  course  egos  exist  in  any  movement,  the  personal  is  always  political,  and  as  humans  we  are  not  purely  logical  (thankfully).  But  our  inability  to  overcome  or  at  least  live  with  certain  differences  of  opinion,  our  inclination  to  get  personal  when  things  get  heated,  and  the  pressure  to  advance  brands  rather  than  the  overall  movement  all  stand  in  the  way  of  ever  achieving  climate  justice.  As  a  species  we  seem  to  have  a  thing  for  leaders.  In  the  climate  movement(s),  the  urge  for  memes  and  trends  leads  us  to  splashing  certain  people’s  faces  and  words  all  over  the  internet,  but  then  we  get  annoyed  and  jealous  when  they  are  identified  by  the  media  as  leaders  or  spokespeople.  Leaders,  especially  charismatic  ones,  can  be  useful  –  to  a  point.  Within  the  movement(s)  we  have  to  recognize  and  exploit  the  strategic  potential  of  having  spokespeople  and  leaders,  but  55  everyone  should  remember  that  they  are  propelled  into  that  role  by  the  movement  in  order  to  serve  the  movement.  The  best  way  to  undermine  false  solutions  is  proposing  real  ones  I’m  not  one  for  the  “if  you  don’t  have  the  solution  you  should  just  keep  quiet”  attitude  which  is  often  used  to  dismiss  dissent,  but  I  do  think  that  not  having  solutions  –  clear  and  compelling  solutions  –  is  bad  strategy.  For  one,  it  makes  resisting  the  false  solutions  that  much  harder.  It  allows  the  cleverer  corporate  agents  a  drop  of  undeserved  legitimacy  as  they  muddy  the  water.  In  terms  of  the  2015  treaty,  what  possible  outcomes  could  be  anything  even  approaching  good  for  climate  justice?  What  real  solutions  stand  a  chance?  I  suspect  there’s  an  array  of  different  opinions,  but  that  most  of  them  hold  little  to  no  hope  of  anything  good  coming  out  of  2015.  Even  the  most  deluded  negotiators  would  probably  struggle  to  say  that  Paris  will  deliver  us  climate  justice  or  a  plan  to  get  it.  But  there  are  still  many  things  to  fight  for  (both  to  advance  and  to  prevent).  Agreeing  on  that  point,  though  basic,  would  be  a  start.  In  terms  of  how  the  2015  deal  is  framed,  my  vote  goes  for  advocating  a  “fairshares”  approach  that  sees  us  set  a  Global  Budget  in  line  with  science  to  keep  us  below  1.5  degrees  warming  that  is  then  portioned  out  according  to  a  balance  of  responsibility  (cumulative,  per  capita,  discounting  survival  emissions)  with  capacity  (using  the  right  indicators  to  ensure  real  equity,  including  a  high  income  threshold).  Countries  unable  to  stay  within  their  fair  share  would  have  to  pay,  and  climate  finance  to  support  developing  countries  stay  within  their  fair  share  would  also  been  a  key  component.  The  work  of  the  Stockholm  Environment  Institute  and  others  to  develop  such  an  approach  helps  us  have  something  both  idealistic  and  possible  –  the  technical  proposal  is  there,  we  have  to  make  it  accessible,  popular,  and  well  messaged.  Overall  I’m  fairly  restrained  in  my  optimism  about  the  possibility  of  a  global  popular  social  movement  for  climate  justice.  The  forces  of  evil  are  strong  and  the  forces  of  good  fragmented.  But  this  is  not  a  struggle  with  a  guaranteed  outcome  either  way.  And  while  it  continues,  we  can  always  find  ways  to  make  success  more  likely.  56  The  Evolution  of  Climate  Justice  Brian  Tokar  Climate  justice  has  emerged  over  more  than  a  decade  now  as  a  political  sensibility,  a  scientific  understanding,  and  an  organizing  agenda,  focused  on  the  disproportionate  impacts  of  the  climate  crisis  on  vulnerable  peoples  and  the  failure  of  conventional,  corporate-­‐driven  solutions.  The  multiple  meanings  of  climate  justice  roughly  correspond  to  the  differing  geographic  locations  of  its  key  proponents:  An  initial  impetus  came  from  indigenous  and  other  land-­‐based  peoples,  mainly  in  the  global  South,  who  have  raised  crucial  demands  at  the  UN  and  other  settings  since  the  early  2000s  around  their  communities’  unique  vulnerability  to  climate  disruptions.  Advocates  for  racial  and  environmental  justice  in  the  US  have  added  additional  dimensions,  including  a  link  to  the  legacies  of  the  civil  rights  movement,  an  understanding  of  the  effects  of  climate  change  on  marginalized  urban  communities,  and  essential  links  to  other  justice-­‐based  movements  around  food,  healthcare,  transportation,  etc.  Explicitly  anticapitalist  formations,  mainly  in  the  US  and  Europe,  have  brought  an  added  critical  dimension,  focused  on  the  systemic  roots  of  the  crisis  and  the  many  corporate-­‐driven  false  solutions,  including  nuclear  power,  biomass  incineration  and  biofuels,  and  the  emergence  of  carbon  markets.  All  three  sectors  are  also  challenging  the  largest  US  expansion  of  fossil  fuel  infrastructure  since  the  economic  boom  years  of  the  1950s.  With  fossil  fuels  now  coming  from  increasingly  extreme  sources,  the  impacts  of  this  new  infrastructure  on  affected  communities  are  immediate  and  often  devastating.  For  some  years  now,  people  engaged  with  all  these  approaches  have  tried  to  figure  out  how  to  work  together.  The  international  Climate  Justice  Now  network  has  become  divided  around  the  question  of  how  much  to  engage  in  the  official  UN  climate  negotiations.  A  fledgling  Mobilization  for  Climate  Justice  in  the  US  in  2009-­‐’10  fell  short  in  engaging  the  leadership  of  community-­‐based  environmental  justice  activists.  The  current  Climate  Justice  Alliance  is  significantly  led  by  people  of  color  groups,  but  seems  reluctant  to  engage  activists  outside  of  its  core  networks  and  best-­‐organized  locales.  Rising  Tide  is  organizing  direct  actions  against  extreme  energy  all  over  the  continent  but  is  limited  in  its  ability  to  speak  for  the  movement  as  a  whole.  So  how  to  move  forward  from  here?  The  global  justice  movement,  which  dramatically  challenged  the  major  international  financial  institutions  during  the  late  1990s-­‐early  2000s  sought  to  revive  the  long-­‐  standing  left  libertarian  vision  of  a  broad-­‐ranging  “movement  of  movements,”  organized  from  below  and  bringing  together  a  diversity  of  voices  into  an  organic  whole,  representing  far  more  than  the  sum  of  its  disparate  parts.  But  that  movement’s  appeal  was  limited  by  its  youth  and  by  “summit-­‐hopping”  strategies  that  embraced  community-­‐based  movements  more  in  rhetoric  than  in  praxis.  The  Occupy  movement  did  a  better  job  for  a  time,  but  a  mix  of  state  repression  and  internal  problems  limited  its  potential.  How  can  the  climate  justice  movement  succeed  where  these  earlier  efforts  fell  short?  The  still-­‐emerging  climate  justice  movement  has  many  unique  qualities  that  suggest  it  can  57  make  a  much  broader  contribution.  It  links  a  uniquely  urgent  environmental  focus  to  a  sharp  critique  of  the  economic  and  political  system.  It  brings  demands  for  racial  justice  and  human  rights  explicitly  into  environmental  organizing,  an  element  increasingly  embraced  by  climate  organizers  from  many  backgrounds  and  various  organizations.  It  offers  a  direct  and  compelling  challenge  to  an  especially  destructive  new  wave  of  resource  extraction,  and  looks  to  indigenous  values,  among  other  inspirations,  as  a  source  of  post-­‐  capitalist  solutions.  One  additional  set  of  actors  has  not  yet  become  fully  engaged  in  climate  justice,  but  needs  to  be  part  of  our  story:  that  is  the  various  efforts  toward  local  solutions  to  the  climate  crisis.  That  includes  people  who  are  localizing  their  food  systems,  greening  their  cities  and  towns,  and  sometimes  creating  community-­‐  owned  energy  alternatives.  Today  these  efforts  often  lack  the  essential  critical  dimension  that’s  inherent  to  climate  justice,  making  various  experiments  more  prone  to  cooptation  and  absorption  into  the  capitalist  market.  But  that  is  beginning  to  change,  from  explicitly  justice-­‐centered  urban  farming  projects  to  some  nonprofit  green  jobs  programs  focused  on  weatherizing  homes.  These  efforts  can  help  us  link  our  resistance  to  a  community-­‐centered  future  vision,  and  to  the  potential  for  a  democratic  confederation-­‐  from-­‐below  of  communities  that  might  help  us  transcend  the  limits  of  localism.  These  experiments  can  also  keep  us  focused  on  the  essential  promise  that  another  world  is  still  possible,  and  that  we  can  live  a  better  quality  of  life  with  less  energy  consumption  and  more  resilient  communities.  We  don’t  yet  have  a  clear  picture  of  the  new  organizing  models  that  can  genuinely  bring  together  all  these  disparate  elements.  The  September  2014  System  Change  Convergence  and  People’s  Climate  March  in  New  York  City,  followed  by  several  days  of  actions  and  educational  events  with  a  specific  climate  justice  focus,  helped  strengthen  the  movement’s  sense  of  political  and  organizational  vision,  and  demonstrated  the  broad  appeal  of  a  justice-­‐  and  liberation-­‐  centered  approach  to  climate  activism.  But  the  next  steps  remain  uncertain,  with  the  right  wing  dominance  of  mainstream  US  and  European  politics  systematically  obstructing  any  policy  measures  that  might  accurately  reflect  the  urgency  of  the  situation.  We  know  the  coming  decades’  climate  changes  will  be  disruptive  and  difficult,  but  our  actions  may  still  help  prevent  them  from  becoming  catastrophic  and  extreme.  This  will  only  come  to  pass,  however,  if  we  keep  our  eyes  on  the  prize  and  create  new  ways  to  work  together.  58  Stop  Accepting  Climate  Change,  Get  Active:  Global  Activism  and  Global  Negotiations  Emily  Williams  We’ve  probably  all  heard  of  the  Five  Stages  of  Climate  Grief.74  It  has  its  roots  in  the  Five  Stages  of  Grief,  and  refers  to  the  emotional  processing  our  society  uses  to  cope  with  climate  change.  First  you  are  in  denial.  You  deny  that  the  earth  is  warming,  you  deny  the  severity  of  climate  change,  and  you  deny  that  current  human  activities  could  cause  it.  Next,  you  become  angry  that  corporations  and  government  have  allowed  for  and  financed  such  reckless  exploitation,  creating  climate  chaos;  or  you  are  angry  that  environmentalists  are  demanding  that  people  change  their  habits  and  give  up  their  comforts  for  the  polar  bears.  Next,  you  bargain.  We  trade  scientific  fact  for  political  gain,  trade  carbon  credits  for  a  few  more  years  of  uncontrolled  burning,  and  trade  our  logical  minds  for  a  monopolized  media  that  will  tell  us  that  the  science  isn’t  that  serious  and  we  will  all  be  ok.  When  one  of  our  cities  is  devastated  by  a  superstorm  or  plagued  by  drought,  we  enter  into  depression.  And  so,  grudgingly,  we  enter  into  acceptance.  Acceptance  is  when  we  acknowledge  the  science  and  explore  solutions….  But  will  we  really  ever  accept?  Acceptance  assumes  that  if  we  understand  climate  science  and  are  given  enough  time  to  move  through  the  five  stages,  our  institutions  74    will  ultimately  collaborate  to  implement  solutions  that  will  mitigate,  and  help  adapt  to,  this  crisis.  However,  if  acceptance  is  enough  to  enact  change,  a  climate  denier  would  not  be  poised  to  be  head  of  the  Senate  Environment  and  Public  Works  committee,  our  government  would  not  continue  subsidizing  the  fossil  fuel  industry,  and  the  fossil  fuel  industry  itself  would  invest  its  money  and  infrastructure  in  renewable  technology  development,  accepting  that  we  must  leave  80%  of  reserves  in  the  ground.75  In  the  five  stages,  there  is  no  mention  activism.  However,  the  climate  crisis  needs  more  than  acceptance.  If  we  are  to  see  meaningful  action  on  climate  change,  we  cannot  wait  for  these  stages  to  play  out;  civil  society  needs  to  pave  the  way76.  Where  are  we  trying  to  get  to?  Let’s  talk  about  2  degrees  Celsius.  The  Copenhagen  Accord  set  the  target,  stating  that  governments  recognize  “that  the  increase  in  global  temperature  should  be  below  2  degrees  Celsius.”  But  what  does  2  degrees  entail?  Was  it  in  fact  science  that  arrived  at  the  2  degree  target  as  a  safe  limit?  Ultimately,  2  degrees  is  a  political  concept;  most  climate  research  shows  little  confidence  in  2  degrees  as  a  safe  limit.77  The  Alliance  of  Small  Island  States  (AOSIS)  –  a  contingent  of  more  than  forty  nations  at  the  COP  –  has  listed  1.5  degrees  of  warming  as  a  safer  limit  that  will  help  avoid  the  worst  catastrophes.78  Yet  it  is  hard  to  put  an  upper  limit  on  how  much  warming  is  “ok”;  no  matter  how  small,  75    76    six-­‐stages-­‐of-­‐climate-­‐grief/  77    two-­‐degrees-­‐global-­‐warming-­‐climate-­‐science/  78    threshold/  59  any  changes  in  the  climate  will  have  repercussions.  Already,  at  0.8  degrees  of  warming,  we  are  seeing  changes  in  our  climate  and  adverse  impacts  on  our  society  occurring  at  an  alarming  rate.  A  2  degree  limit  leaves  island  states  underwater,  or  at  least  inhabitable.  Representatives  from  African  nations  and  Pacific  Island  nations  stated  that  by  signing  onto  the  accord,  they  would  be  signing  a  “suicide  pact.”79  By  agreeing  to  this  political  limit,  our  governments  have  already  sold  out  the  Global  South,  committing  one  of  the  worst  and  largest-­‐scale  injustices.  However,  to  illustrate  just  how  hard  it  will  be  to  stay  within  even  2  degrees,  we  need  to  understand  the  carbon  gap.  The  carbon  gap  is  the  difference  between  the  rates  of  emissions  we  need  to  stay  under  to  achieve  climate  stability  versus  our  actual  rate  of  emissions.  Closing  this  gap  would  mean  achieving  a  modicum  of  climate  stability.  However,  our  current  rate  of  emissions  is  not  slowing,  and  the  gap  widens80.  Kevin  Anderson,  Deputy  Director  of  the  Tyndall  Centre,  outlined  the  global  emissions  cuts  we  need  to  make  if  we  are  to  stay  below  2  degrees.81  Anderson’s  plan  not  only  closes  the  gap,  but  factors  in  climate  justice.  Granting  non-­‐Annex  1  countries  (or  developing  countries)  a  carbon  budget  so  that  they  may  continue  to  develop  and  phase  away  from  fossil  fuels,  Anderson  details  that  the  wealthy  nations  of  Annex  1  need  to  cut  70%  of  their  emissions  in  10  years.  To  put  that  figure  in  perspective,  by  2023  the  U.S.  would  have  to  cut  the  equivalent  of  all  the  emission  from  the  electricity,  transportation,  79    crossroads/2014/sep/09/new-­‐york-­‐climate-­‐summit-­‐two-­‐  degrees-­‐warming-­‐policy-­‐disaster  80    81http://  esentations/What-­‐Next.pdf  and  agriculture  sectors.82  In  November  2014,  the  United  States  and  China  reached  a  “historic  agreement”,  committing  the  nations  to  certain  emissions  cuts  and  peaks  in  emissions  –  the  United  States  would  decrease  its  emissions  by  26-­‐28%  of  2005  levels  by  2025;  China  would  peak  its  emissions  in  2030  with  20%  of  its  electricity  pledged  to  come  from  non-­‐fossil  fuel  sources.83  This  agreement  is  historic  in  that  it  was  not  mandatory,  and  it  was  made  by  two  of  the  most  powerful  countries  in  the  climate  negotiations.  However,  this  agreement  is  non-­‐binding,  and  translates  to  a  10%  emissions  cut  from  the  base  year  scientists  use.  So  can  we  succeed  in  reducing  our  emissions  to  stay  below  2  degrees?  It’s  not  impossible,  but  ambitious  and  extremely  difficult,  especially  if  there  isn’t  financial  support  and  regulatory  pressure  to  enable  the  transition.  Climate  activism  as  a  tool  to  reach  our  goal  If  we  are  to  ensure  that  our  five  stages  of  climate  grief  result  in  ambitious  action  instead  of  a  numb  acceptance  of  the  horrors  that  are  to  occur,  we  have  to  rethink  how  we  as  civil  society  engage  to  catalyze  ambitious  action.  Civil  society  is  responsible  for  the  agreement  that  the  US  and  China  reached  last  week;  civil  society  pushed,  and  in  the  wake  of  the  Republican  Party’s  sweep  of  the  2014  midterm  elections,  U.S.  President  Barack  Obama  chose  to  take  a  stand  and  leave  his  legacy  as  an  actor  on  climate.  We  now  know  that  the  administration  listens  to  us;  this  past  week,  Obama  addressed  the  Young  Southeast  Asian  Leaders  Initiative  and  said  “the  issue  of  82    tml  83    divestment_b_6147234.html  60  climate  change  is  a  perfect  example  of  why  young  people  have  to  lead.”84  But  if  we  are  to  see  a  more  ambitious  agreement  and  achieve  significant  action  on  climate  change  that  adheres  to  the  severity  of  the  crisis,  and  if  we  are  to  achieve  climate  justice,  we  need  to  push  harder.  Nations  will  not  make  progress  if  their  civil  societies  do  not  push  them.  No  matter  how  much  we  hope,  our  governments’  negotiators  will  never  author  a  treaty  of  which  we  would  be  proud  unless  there  is  sufficient  pressure  coming  from  their  own  people  to  push  them  in  the  right  direction.  Despite  being  seemingly  easy  targets,  negotiators  at  the  COP  have  relatively  little  freedom  to  make  the  decisions  they  want  to  see.  At  COP  19  in  Warsaw,  Trigg  Talley  –  the  U.S.  Senior  State  Department  Negotiator  –  told  me  flat  out  that  he  wished  he  could  do  more  to  effect  change  at  the  COP,  but  unfortunately  his  hands  were  tied  and  he  lost  faith  in  the  process  a  long  time  ago.  Now  whether  Mr.  Talley  was  being  honest  or  if  he  was  just  trying  to  escape  my  badgering,  we  do  not  know.  What  we  do  know  though  is  that  these  negotiators,  despite  being  visible  and  easily  accessible  by  civil  society  at  the  COP,  will  not  make  the  changes  we  want  to  see  unless  they  are  told  to  do  so  by  their  superiors.  That  means  that  we  need  to  mobilize.  Especially  now  that  there  is  only  one  year  between  Lima  and  COP  21  in  Paris,  we  need  to  mobilize  even  more,  grow  stronger,  and  build  a  people’s  movement  that  can  effectively  push  our  governments  to  enter  into  that  conference  with  the  kind  of  ambition  that  would  make  us  proud.  So  let’s  84    youth-­‐on-­‐climate-­‐change-­‐old-­‐people-­‐theyve-­‐created-­‐a-­‐  mess/  take  a  look  at  how  one  campaign  –  divestment  –  manages  to  do  that.  Fossil  Fuel  Divestment  and  the  Road  to  2015  We’ve  heard  a  lot  about  divestment  over  the  past  few  years:  Bill  McKibben  became  an  unlikely  rock  star  overnight  with  the  Do  The  Math  tour,  the  campaign  spread  to  new  continents  making  it  an  international  effort,  and  the  Rockefellers  –  the  family  that  made  its  fortune  from  oil  –  chose  to  divest.  Divestment  gives  a  face  to  the  crisis,  allowing  people  to  rally  around  a  target  and  feel  empowered  to  take  their  futures  into  their  own  hands,  therefore  democratizing  the  issue  of  climate  change.  Divestment  has  the  power  to  change  the  public  perception  of  the  fossil  fuel  industry.  It  points  to  the  culprit  and  organizes  the  masses  to  demand  that  their  institutions  –  their  campuses,  businesses,  churches,  or  cities  –  refuse  to  profit  from  that  industry.  When  enough  institutions  divest,  it  creates  a  tipping  point  where  people  become  passionate  about  the  issue  and  put  enough  pressure  on  their  elected  officials  to  start  representing  their  needs  instead  of  the  desires  of  oil  barons.  Divestment  also  frees  up  finance,  forcing  institutions  and  our  government  to  shift  finances  away  from  the  industry  that’s  launching  us  over  the  edge  and  instead  begin  to  finance  and  build  the  low-­‐carbon,  just  economy  we  need.  This  is  the  reinvestment  side  of  the  campaign,  and  it  goes  far  beyond  moving  that  money  into  renewable  technology  development.  When  we  divest,  we  can  reinvest  in  communities  –  in  their  resilience  and  in  community-­‐owned  energy  generation  –  and  in  radical  and  innovative  solutions.  The  campaign  is  works  with  both  yin  and  yang:  it  identifies  that  which  is  harmful,  denounces  it,  and  calls  upon  society  61  to  denounce  it  as  well;  but  it  also  identifies  the  real  solutions,  and  financially  and  ideologically  supports  those  solutions  by  investing  in  them.  There  are  a  fair  number  of  critiques  of  divestment  –  that  it’s  too  symbolic  and  draws  attention  from  what  really  works  (on-­‐the-­‐  ground  resistance);  that  it  is  an  elitist  campaign  and  excludes  those  who  are  the  most  marginalized  by  the  climate  movement  and  those  who  are  most  affected  by  the  industry,  both  in  the  U.S.  and  abroad;  and  that  isn’t  radical  if  folks  like  Tom  Steyer  can  hop  on  board  to  perpetuate  the  same  old  capitalist,  exploitative,  immoral  system.85  A  lot  of  those  critiques  have  validity,  and  like  most  campaigns,  the  divestment  campaign  has  made  many  mistakes  and  still  has  a  lot  to  learn  before  reaching  its  effective  potential.  But  it  learns  from  its  mistakes,  and  therefore  creates  a  platform  on  which  many  related  campaigns  can  converge  into  a  global  movement.  So  what  is  the  role  of  divestment  in  national  and  international  politics?  Divestment  is  local  –  it’s  implemented  at  the  local  level,  and  has  direct  local  repercussions.  Yet  its  ability  to  influence  the  public  opinion  on  climate  change  gives  it  a  global  scope.  It  is  a  solidarity  campaign  that  allows  institutions  to  take  a  stand  and  commit  to  the  transition  to  a  low-­‐  carbon  and  just  future,  standing  on  the  side  of  future  generations  and  those  most  disproportionately  impacted  by  both  climate  change  and  the  extractive  economy.  It  commits  to  invest  in  the  solutions  that  the  Global  South  so  desperately  need.  This  shift  impacts  negotiations.  When  enough  institutions  in  a  country  divest,  it  begins  to  change  the  climate  and  discourse  around  85    divestment-­‐how-­‐evolve-­‐campaign-­‐beyond-­‐its-­‐shortcomings  climate  change  and  the  fossil  fuel  economy.  It  ultimately  shifts  the  political  atmosphere  of  the  country  and  puts  pressure  on  governments  to  go  into  the  negotiations  with  a  few  more  bargaining  chips.  When  our  campuses,  states,  foundations,  and  other  institutions  divest  in  the  United  States,  it  will  give  Obama  the  go-­‐ahead  and  the  political  backing  to  offer  more  at  the  UN.  It’s  up  to  us  Divestment,  and  every  other  campaign  that  focuses  on  local  and  grassroots  action,  shifts  systems  and  create  tipping  points.  Civil  rights,  women’s  rights,  and  democracy  were  all  won  by  local,  grassroots  actions  and  narratives.  They  have  the  power  to  create  a  peoples’  movement  that  creates  the  political  backing  (or  pressure)  that  allows  for  (or  forces)  governments  to  enact  changes  that  work  for  the  people  over  profit.  But  no  one  else  is  going  to  create  this  change.  If  we  want  to  see  change,  it’s  up  to  us.  It  is  unlikely  that  any  agreement  reached  in  Paris  will  manage  to  “lead  the  world  away  from  its  current  destination  of  global  climate  apartheid  and  toward  climate  justice.”  To  accomplish  that,  we  would  need  to  build  the  largest  movement  ever  in  the  history  of  humanity,  and  most  likely  experience  many  devastating  natural  disasters  that  have  a  severe  negative  impact  on  the  global  economy.  That  movement  would  have  to  be  built  in  six  months  to  give  time  to  the  heads  of  state  to  design  a  treaty  that  would  sufficiently  respond  to  the  threats  of  climate  change,  mitigate  emissions  as  ambitiously  as  possible,  and  finance  extreme  adaptation  to  reduce  the  level  of  damage  that  will  be  experienced  by  the  Global  South.  It  is  unlikely  to  happen.  What  can  happen,  however,  is  that  between  now  and  Paris,  we  can  begin  to  62  build  that  movement  and  be  ready  to  launch  the  biggest,  most  diverse,  and  most  radical  movement  the  world  has  ever  seen  in  Paris  when  the  final  decision  is  made.  We  can  launch  that  movement  on  the  last  day  of  COP  21.  We  will  still  fail  the  Global  South  and  condemn  many,  many  lives,  but  we  can  still  save  some.  Many  in  our  society  have  moved  through  all  five  stages  of  grief,  and  hang  in  an  uneasy  balance  of  acceptance  and  denial  as  they  anxiously  place  hope  in  the  status  quo’s  ability  to  make  the  changes  necessary.  But  it’s  time  to  stop  accepting  and  start  acting.  If  we  want  to  see  global  change,  we  need  a  global  movement  –  and  that  movement  needs  to  come  from  the  grassroots,  be  led  by  those  most  disproportionately  impacted,  and  create  the  solutions  that  our  generation  needs.  Let’s  get  active,  very  active,  now.  63  Vision,  Hope,  and  Power:  A  Contribution  to  the  Discussion  Leehi  Yona  What  a  loaded  question.  When  I  was  first  asked  to  answer  it,  I  struggled.  I  see  and  interact  with  climate  change  from  many  points  of  view  –  as  a  community  organizer,  as  a  budding  climate  scientist,  as  a  policymaker-­‐  in-­‐training,  as  an  amateur  sociologist,  as  an  American  student,  as  an  Israeli,  as  a  Canadian,  as  a  representative  of  future  generations.  How  could  I  possibly  condense  these  viewpoints  into  two  pages?  If  I  could  pull  some  key  thoughts,  I’d  break  it  down  into  these  nine  words:  vision,  outrage,  hope,  humanity,  storytelling,  celebration,  interaction,  mobilization,  and  power.  These  thoughts  by  no  means  encapsulate  all  I  have  to  say  about  this  question,  but  it  brings  to  light  some  short,  important  personal  realizations  I’ve  had  in  my  climate  justice  work.  Vision  What  is  a  vision?  A  vision  is  the  broader  imagination,  the  future  we  can  see  within  our  grasp.  A  vision  is  boldly  optimistic,  ambitious,  dream-­‐like.  Of  course,  our  vision  is  vitally  important  in  determining  our  decisions.  Above  all,  we  need  to  be  driven  by  a  vision,  not  a  goal.  This  understanding  is  crucial.  Our  motivations  for  our  work  –  the  things  that  govern  what  we  do  –  should  be  huge,  and  hopeful,  and  even  unrealistic  at  first.  That  is  fine,  because  they  are  visions  –  they  shouldn’t  be  solutions  that  would  work  within  the  systems  we  currently  have,  but  solutions  that  transcend  beyond  these  very  systems.  They  should  be  wildly  idealistic,  because  even  the  most  idealistic  of  visions  have  been  achieved  in  history  with  a  little  faith.  Outrage  Where  is  the  outrage?  Seriously,  where  is  it?  We  need  more  outrage!  We  need  to  convey  the  urgency  of  this  problem,  the  way  we  feel  it  sink  a  heavy  weight  onto  our  hearts.  We  need  to  make  others  –  particularly  those  in  power  –  feel  the  suffering,  feel  the  heartbreak,  feel  the  injustice,  feel  the  outrage  that  global  warming  stirs.  The  time  has  passed  to  temper  our  anger;  we  cannot  and  should  not  subdue  our  burning  fire  that  energizes  us  to  find  the  solutions  to  this  climate  challenge.  Hope  This  outrage  cannot  survive  without  hope.  We  cannot  exist  without  hope.  And  we  need  even  more  than  just  hope  to  solve  a  problem  as  monstrous  as  the  one  we  are  facing  –  we  need  extravagant  hope,  the  unwavering  and  fervent  belief  that  we  will  rise  to  the  occasion  and  find  a  solution  to  the  climate  crisis.  Yes,  we  can  be  critical  (we  must),  yes,  we  must  have  outrage  –  but  we  must  never  lose  sight  of  our  vision,  lose  sight  of  hope.  To  do  so,  to  allow  our  cynicism  and  pessimism  to  consume  us,  would  be  condemning  ourselves  to  failure  by  default.  We  must  couple  our  urgency  with  active  hope.  Humanity  We  must  remember  that  climate  change  has  a  human  face.  Global  warming  is  not  about  rising  sea  levels  and  extreme  weather  events  –  it’s  about  Ula  who  lives  in  the  Maldives  and  doesn’t  know  where  her  children  will  live,  Olivia  who  lives  in  a  First  Nations  community  and  doesn’t  know  what’s  in  her  drinking  water  –  it’s  about  these  people  on  the  front  lines.  64  Acknowledging  our  shared  humanity  when  speaking  about  climate  change  is  also  about  acknowledging  that  some  communities  are  disproportionally  affected  by  climate  change  compared  to  others.  This  particularly  includes  communities  of  lower  socioeconomic  status,  people  of  colour,  and  women.  We  need  to  make  sure  that  these  voices  are  amplified  within  our  movement,  so  that  the  most  common  face  speaking  about  climate  change  isn’t  that  of  affluent  white  men.  Let’s  bring  more  humanity  into  our  movement  by  striving  to  have  a  real  anti-­‐oppression  model  of  leadership.  Storytelling  and  Power  This  humanity  is  why  we  need  storytelling.  Numbers  and  data  don’t  really  work  when  it  comes  to  motivating  people  to  act  on  climate  change  –  but  the  stories  of  those  suffering  climate  injustices  do.  An  important  element  to  acknowledge  when  it  comes  to  climate  change  is  the  third  dimension  of  power.  This  dimension  of  power  is  one  that  isn’t  directly  exerted  upon  a  person,  one  wherein  consciousness  is  manipulated.  The  third  dimension  of  power  here  is  one  that  is  exerted  upon  us  by  broken  systems  of  governance  and  fossil  fuel  companies  that  make  us  believe  that  sweeping  change  isn’t  possible  or  feasible  when  it  comes  to  climate  action.  But  this  isn’t  true.  We  do  have  the  power  to  change  things  –  we  must  re-­‐write  the  narrative  we’re  being  given,  the  narrative  that  is  being  told.  Storytelling  is  vital.  Chee  Yoke  Ling  of  Third  World  Network  once  told  me  that  youth  have  the  power  to  bring  the  future  into  the  present.  We  must  do  this  through  storytelling.  We  need  this  framing  to  bypass  the  human  exemptionalism  that  is  wreaking  havoc  on  climate  progress.  Celebration  I  cannot  stress  this  enough.  Celebrate!  Celebrate  every  little  accomplishment  worth  celebrating.  Celebrate  your  colleagues,  celebrate  your  volunteers,  and  most  importantly,  celebrate  yourselves  and  the  collective  work  you  are  all  doing.  We  rarely  celebrate  in  this  movement  –  we  move  forward  too  quickly.  As  soon  as  we’ve  finished  a  march,  as  we’ve  done  whatever  needs  to  be  done  –  we  move  on  to  the  next  task  at  hand.  We  rarely  celebrate  the  beautiful  thing  we’ve  just  done.  Of  course,  this  behaviour  makes  sense,  considering  the  urgency  of  climate  change  –  but  it  is  unsustainable!  Celebrate!  Interaction  When  we’re  working  on  effecting  positive  change,  it’s  important  to  nurture  our  relationships  with  each  other,  and  with  nature.  Many  of  us  may  lose  sight  of  this.  Think  about  it:  for  those  of  you  working  on  organizing  this  march,  what  did  you  spend  most  of  your  time  doing?  You  were  most  likely,  just  as  I  was,  glued  to  your  computer,  to  social  media,  to  various  screens  that  disconnect  us  both  from  each  other  and  from  the  very  planet  we’re  trying  to  save.  That  needs  to  change.  We  need  more  direct,  face-­‐  to-­‐face  interactions  and  conversations  with  the  people  who  matter  –  with  everyone.  Mobilization  There  are  frequently  such  marches  and  rallies  that  take  place…  yet  usually,  the  end  outcome  is  that  people  go  home  and  after  a  65  few  days  ask  themselves,  “Well,  now  what?”  Now,  we  must  mobilize!  Too  often  such  gatherings  are  plagued  by  a  lack  of  concrete  demands  or  next  steps.  Let’s  make  sure  our  demands  and  asks  are  clear.  Power  As  I  mentioned  earlier,  power  dynamics  are  entirely  at  play  when  it  comes  to  global  warming  inaction.  We  must  recognize  these  sources  of  disempowerment  and  target  them  directly  to  shift  it  back  to  the  people.  Like  I  said,  these  words  do  not  encompass  all  I  have  to  say  –  but  I  do  believe  that  they  can  bring  us  closer  to  building  the  movement  we  need  for  real  climate  justice.  66  APPENDIX:  Climate  Justice  Manifestos  Editors’  note:  we  have  assembled  this  by  no  means  comprehensive  list  of  climate  justice  manifestos  so  that  the  movement  can  see  some  of  its  own  demands  evolve  over  time.  Many  of  these  manifestos  have  been  drawn  from  the  website  of  the  Centre  for  Civil  Society,  University  of  KwaZulu-­‐Natal:    ,  which  we  gratefully  acknowledge.  At  the  CCS  website,  Patrick  Bond  “defines”  climate  justice  as  “the  fusion  of  social  and  environmental  justice  philosophies,  political  practices  and  projects  aiming  to  both  redefine  and  redistribute  wealth  and  to  transform  socio-­‐economic  relations,  grounded  in  a  political-­‐ecological  praxis  (analysis-­‐activism)  that  seeks  root  causes  and  proposes  and  implements  genuine  solutions  to  the  climate  crisis.”86  86  See  also    statements/  67  Durban  Group  for  Climate  Justice,  Durban,  October  2004  “The  Durban  Declaration  on  Carbon  Trading”  As  representatives  of  people’s  movements  and  independent  organisations,  we  reject  the  claim  that  carbon  trading  will  halt  the  climate  crisis.  This  crisis  has  been  caused  more  than  anything  else  by  the  mining  of  fossil  fuels  and  the  release  of  their  carbon  to  the  oceans,  air,  soil  and  living  things.  This  excessive  burning  of  fossil  fuels  is  now  jeopardising  Earth’s  ability  to  maintain  a  liveable  climate.  Governments,  export  credit  agencies,  corporations  and  international  financial  institutions  continue  to  support  and  finance  fossil  fuel  exploration,  extraction  and  other  activities  that  worsen  global  warming,  such  as  forest  degradation  and  destruction  on  a  massive  scale,  while  dedicating  only  token  sums  to  renewable  energy.  It  is  particularly  disturbing  that  the  World  Bank  has  recently  defied  the  recommendation  of  its  own  Extractive  Industries  Review  which  calls  for  the  phasing  out  of  World  Bank  financing  for  coal,  oil  and  gas  extraction.  We  denounce  the  further  delays  in  ending  fossil  fuel  extraction  that  are  being  caused  by  corporate,  government  and  United  Nations’  attempts  to  construct  a  ‘carbon  market’,  including  a  market  trading  in  ‘carbon  sinks.’  History  has  seen  attempts  to  commodify  land,  food,  labour,  forests,  water,  genes  and  ideas.  Carbon  trading  follows  in  the  footsteps  of  this  history  and  turns  the  earth’s  carbon-­‐cycling  capacity  into  property  to  be  bought  or  sold  in  a  global  market.  Through  this  process  of  creating  a  new  commodity  –  carbon  –  the  Earth’s  ability  and  capacity  to  support  a  climate  conducive  to  life  and  human  societies  is  now  passing  into  the  same  corporate  hands  that  are  destroying  the  climate.  People  around  the  world  need  to  be  made  aware  of  this  commodification  and  privatisation  and  actively  intervene  to  ensure  the  protection  of  the  Earth’s  climate.  Carbon  trading  will  not  contribute  to  achieving  this  protection  of  the  Earth’s  climate.  It  is  a  false  solution  which  entrenches  and  magnifies  social  inequalities  in  many  ways:  –  The  carbon  market  creates  transferable  rights  to  dump  carbon  in  the  air,  oceans,  soil  and  vegetation  far  in  excess  of  the  capacity  of  these  systems  to  hold  it.  Billions  of  dollars  worth  of  these  rights  are  to  be  awarded  free  of  charge  to  the  biggest  corporate  emitters  of  greenhouse  gases  in  the  electric  power,  iron  and  steel,  cement,  pulp  and  paper,  and  other  sectors  in  industrialised  nations  who  have  caused  the  climate  crisis  and  already  exploit  these  systems  the  most.  Costs  of  future  reductions  in  fossil  fuel  use  are  likely  to  fall  disproportionately  on  the  public  sector,  communities,  indigenous  peoples  and  individual  taxpayers.  –  The  Kyoto  Protocol’s  Clean  Development  Mechanism  (CDM),  as  well  as  many  private  sector  trading  schemes,  encourage  industrialised  countries  and  their  corporations  to  finance  or  create  cheap  carbon  dumps  such  as  large-­‐scale  tree  plantations  in  the  South  as  a  lucrative  alternative  to  reducing  emissions  in  the  North.  Other  CDM  projects,  such  as  68  hydrochlorofluorocarbons  (HCFC)  -­‐reduction  schemes,  focus  on  end-­‐of  pipe  technologies  and  thus  do  nothing  to  reduce  the  impact  of  –  Fossil  fuel  industries’  impacts  on  local  communities.  In  addition,  these  projects  dwarf  the  tiny  volume  of  renewable  energy  projects  which  constitute  the  CDM’s  sustainable  development  window-­‐dressing.  –  Impacts  from  fossil-­‐fuel  industries  and  other  greenhouse-­‐gas  producing  industries  such  as  displacement,  pollution,  or  climate  change,  are  already  disproportionately  felt  by  small  island  states,  coastal  peoples,  indigenous  peoples,  local  communities,  fisherfolk,  women,  youth,  poor  people,  elderly  and  marginalised  communities.  CDM  projects  intensify  these  impacts  in  several  ways.  First,  they  sanction  continued  exploration  for,  and  extraction,  refining  and  burning  of  fossil  fuels.  Second,  by  providing  finance  for  private  sector  projects  such  as  industrial  tree  plantations,  they  appropriate  land,  water  and  air  already  supporting  the  lives  and  livelihoods  of  local  communities  for  new  carbon  dumps  for  Northern  industries.  –  The  refusal  to  phase  out  the  use  of  coal,  oil  and  gas,  which  is  further  entrenched  by  carbon  trading,  is  also  causing  more  and  more  military  conflicts  around  the  world,  magnifying  social  and  environmental  injustice.  This  in  turn  diverts  vast  resources  to  military  budgets  which  could  otherwise  be  utilised  to  support  economies  based  on  renewable  energies  and  energy  efficiency.  –  In  addition  to  these  injustices,  the  internal  weaknesses  and  contradictions  of  carbon  trading  are  in  fact  likely  to  make  global  warming  worse  rather  than  ‘mitigate’  it.  CDM  projects,  for  instance,  cannot  be  verified  to  be  ‘neutralising’  any  given  quantity  of  fossil  fuel  extraction  and  burning.  Their  claim  to  be  able  to  do  so  is  increasingly  dangerous  because  it  creates  the  illusion  that  consumption  and  production  patterns,  particularly  in  the  North,  can  be  maintained  without  harming  the  climate.  –  In  addition,  because  of  the  verification  problem,  as  well  as  a  lack  of  credible  regulation,  no  one  in  the  CDM  market  is  likely  to  be  sure  what  they  are  buying.  Without  a  viable  commodity  to  trade,  the  CDM  market  and  similar  private  sector  trading  schemes  are  a  total  waste  of  time  when  the  world  has  a  critical  climate  crisis  to  address.  –  In  an  absurd  contradiction  the  World  Bank  facilitates  these  false,  market-­‐based  approaches  to  climate  change  through  its  Prototype  Carbon  Fund,  the  BioCarbon  Fund  and  the  Community  Development  Carbon  Fund  at  the  same  time  it  is  promoting,  on  a  far  greater  scale,  the  continued  exploration  for,  and  extraction  and  burning  of  fossil  fuels  –  many  of  which  are  to  ensure  increased  emissions  of  the  North.  In  conclusion,  ‘giving  carbon  a  price’  will  not  prove  to  be  any  more  effective,  democratic,  or  conducive  to  human  welfare,  than  giving  genes,  forests,  biodiversity  or  clean  rivers  a  price.  We  reaffirm  that  drastic  reductions  in  emissions  from  fossil  fuel  use  are  a  prerequisite  if  we  are  to  avert  the  climate  crisis.  We  affirm  our  responsibility  to  coming  generations  to  seek  real  solutions  that  are  viable  and  truly  sustainable  and  that  do  not  sacrifice  marginalised  communities.  We  therefore  commit  ourselves  to  help  build  a  global  grassroots  movement  for  climate  justice,  mobilise  communities  around  the  world  and  pledge  our  solidarity  with  people  opposing  carbon  trading  on  the  ground.  69  Climate  Justice  Now!  “Founding  Statement”  Bali,  December  14,  2007  Peoples  from  social  organizations  and  movements  from  across  the  globe  brought  the  fight  for  social,  ecological  and  gender  justice  into  the  negotiating  rooms  and  onto  the  streets  during  the  UN  climate  summit  in  Bali.  Inside  and  outside  the  convention  centre,  activists  demanded  alternative  policies  and  practices  that  protect  livelihoods  and  the  environment.  In  dozens  of  side  events,  reports,  impromptu  protests  and  press  conferences,  the  false  solutions  to  climate  change  –  such  as  carbon  offsetting,  carbon  trading  for  forests,  agrofuels,  trade  liberalization  and  privatization  pushed  by  governments,  financial  institutions  and  multinational  corporations  –  have  been  exposed.  Affected  communities,  Indigenous  Peoples,  women  and  peasant  farmers  called  for  real  solutions  to  the  climate  crisis,  solutions  which  have  failed  to  capture  the  attention  of  political  leaders.  These  genuine  solutions  include:  –  Reduced  consumption.  –  Huge  financial  transfers  from  North  to  South  based  on  historical  responsibility  and  ecological  debt  for  adaptation  and  mitigation  costs  paid  for  by  redirecting  military  budgets,  innovative  taxes  and  debt  cancellation.  –  Leaving  fossil  fuels  in  the  ground  and  investing  in  appropriate  energy-­‐efficiency  and  safe,  clean  and  community-­‐led  renewable  energy.  –  Rights  based  resource  conservation  that  enforces  Indigenous  land  rights  and  promotes  peoples’  sovereignty  over  energy,  forests,  land  and  water.  –  Sustainable  family  farming  and  peoples’  food  sovereignty.  Inside  the  negotiations,  the  rich  industrialized  countries  have  put  unjustifiable  pressure  on  Southern  governments  to  commit  to  emissions’  reductions.  At  the  same  time,  they  have  refused  to  live  up  to  their  own  legal  and  moral  obligations  to  radically  cut  emissions  and  support  developing  countries’  efforts  to  reduce  emissions  and  adapt  to  climate  impacts.  Once  again,  the  majority  world  is  being  forced  to  pay  for  the  excesses  of  the  minority.  Compared  to  the  outcomes  of  the  official  negotiations,  the  major  success  of  Bali  is  the  momentum  that  has  been  built  towards  creating  a  diverse,  global  movement  for  climate  justice.  We  will  take  our  struggle  forward  not  just  in  the  talks,  but  on  the  ground  and  in  the  streets  –  Climate  Justice  Now!  70  Climate  Justice  Alliance,  February  2010  “What  does  Climate  Justice  mean  in  Europe?”  This  discussion  paper  was  drafted  by  a  working  group  at  the  Climate  Justice  Alliance  meeting  in  Amsterdam  in  February  2010.  Its  purpose  is  to  collectively  explore  the  concept  of  climate  justice  in  the  context  of  Europe.  Through  providing  this  discussion  paper  as  both  incomplete  and  unending,  we  hope  it  will  be  useful  as  a  tool  in  linking  the  diverse  struggles  throughout  Europe  and  elsewhere,  and  strengthen  the  collective  movement  towards  our  visions  of  the  future.  In  choosing  Europe  as  the  terrain  of  this  discussion,  we  are  not  separating  ourselves  from  those  struggling  elsewhere  in  the  world.  On  the  contrary,  through  asking  what  the  basis  of  climate  justice  is  in  on  our  own  doorstep,  and  discovering  how  we  go  about  implementing  it,  we  are  fighting  for  a  better  world  for  all.  The  abject  failure  of  governments  to  provide  a  political  solution  to  the  climate  crisis  in  Copenhagen  was  unsurprising  to  those  who,  from  the  outset,  understood  the  UN  as  an  institution  whose  interests  lie  in  extending  the  legitimacy  of  global  capitalism  and  the  nation-­‐state.  Those  who  placed  their  hope  in  the  COP15,  due  either  to  naivety  or  necessity,  left  with  a  sense  of  disbelief.  More  and  more  are  now  coming  to  the  realisation  that  it  is  social  movements,  not  governments,  that  have  the  power  to  make  the  necessary  changes  to  solve  the  climate  crisis.  Linking  with  social  struggle.  The  solutions  to  systematic  repression,  exploitation,  and  the  climate  crisis  are  the  same.  Climate  Justice  means  linking  all  struggles  together  that  reject  neoliberal  markets  and  working  towards  a  world  that  puts  autonomous  decision  making  power  in  the  hands  of  the  communities.  We  look  towards  a  society  which  recognises  our  historical  responsibilities  and  seeks  to  protect  the  global  commons,  both  in  terms  of  the  climate  and  life  itself.  Solidarity.  From  the  shanty  towns  of  the  Americas  to  the  precariats  of  Europe,  the  global  south  is  all  of  those,  whether  resisting  or  not,  who  suffer  the  impacts  of  the  relationships  of  capital  and  domination.  It  is  important  to  recognise  that  the  marginalised  in  the  geographic  south  are  also  the  front  line  of  the  struggle  for  climate  justice.  Solidarity  is  the  realisation  of  the  common  struggle.  It  is  realising  that  the  geography  which  divides  us  is  insignificant  compared  to  the  strength  of  the  values  that  hold  us  together  –  our  shared  affirmation  of  life  and  liberty  in  the  face  of  exploitation  and  oppression.  Solidarity  means  fighting  for  our  own  autonomy  at  the  same  time  as  we  struggle  against  corporations  and  the  relationships  of  capital  that  exploit  people  everywhere.  The  EU.  Europe,  including  the  EU,  is  historically  responsible  for  climate  change  and  social  and  environmental  exploitation  world  wide.  The  EU  as  a  political  institution  serves  only  to  extend  the  interests  of  the  wealthy  and  the  powerful.  Its  Lisbon  Agenda,  and  the  more  recent  2020  Agenda,  looks  to  increase  the  dominance  of  European  based  corporations  and  extend  the  rule  of  capital  into  every  sphere  of  our  lives.  Its  pursuit  of  the  Emissions  Trading  Scheme  has  pioneered  a  system  that  serves  only  to  profit  from  our  ecological  crises,  its  Bologna  process  turns  71  our  universities  into  ‘sausage  factories’,  whilst  the  EU  trade  strategy  looks  to  control  access  to  natural  resources  and  cheap  labour  for  European  corporations,  continuing  its  historical  legacy  of  colonialism  through  different  methods.  Overcoming  institutions  that  override  the  autonomy  of  communities  through  tying  us  to  capitalist  growth  is  essential  if  we  are  to  move  towards  an  ecologically  and  socially  just  world.  Food  and  Agriculture.  Climate  Justice  is  closely  linked  to  breaking  the  circle  of  industrialised  agricultural  production  perpetuated  through  WTO  and  European  policies.  Speculation  on  food  as  an  industrial  commodity  and  the  domination  of  long  unsustainable  production  chains  by  international  capital  threatens  the  biosphere  and  the  lives  of  billions  of  people.  This  attack  on  food  sovereignty  and  the  planet  must  be  met  with  a  social  struggle  for  food  production  defined  by  the  needs  and  rights  of  local  communities.  This  means  redefining,  re-­‐  localising  and  re-­‐appropriating  the  control  of  our  food  and  agricultural  systems  through  engaging  and  acting  in  solidarity  with  existing  struggles.  Military.  In  Europe,  as  elsewhere,  the  military-­‐industrial  complex  is  one  of  the  key  actors  in  maintaining  business  as  usual  in  the  current  dominant  economic  political  system.  Under  the  false  promise  of  ensuring  ‘security’  and  in  the  ‘war  against  terror’,  huge  and  ever  increasing  budgets  are  being  spent  on  military  and  policing  infrastructure.  Often  military  ventures  are  thinly  veiled  attempts  at  securing  access  to  foreign  resources  and  ensuring  vast  profits  for  the  arms  industry.  The  real  security  threat  we  face  cannot  be  addressed  by  armed  force  and  social  control.  Social  exclusion,  poverty,  loss  of  biodiversity,  ecosystem  collapse,  and  increasingly  scarce  resources  leading  to  an  escalation  in  conflicts  and  resource  wars,  are  posing  a  far  bigger  threat  than  the  ghost  of  terror,  or  any  other  imaginary  foe  created  to  mask  the  social  conflicts  that  exists  within  and  between  our  societies.  The  struggle  for  climate  justice  is  about  highlighting  another  concept  of  sustainable  ‘human  security’,  which  a  military  and  policing  force  will  never  be  able  to  guarantee.  In  practice  by  resisting  changes  in  our  global  systems,  the  military  and  police  apparatus  is  endangering  security,  not  increasing  it.  Migration.  Climate  change  is  exacerbating  factors  which  force  people  to  migrate;  lack  of  access  to  land  or  livelihood,  failing  agriculture,  conflict  and  lack  of  access  to  water.  The  tiny  proportion  of  those  displaced  who  attempt  the  expensive  and  dangerous  journey,  are  met  with  militarised  border  controls  if  they  reach  ‘Fortress  Europe.’  Labelled  ‘illegals,’  they  are  denied  basic  human  rights  and  struggle  to  live  in  dignity,  whilst  providing  a  neat  scapegoat  for  a  range  of  social  problems.  The  historical  development  of  capital  accumulation,  colonialism  and  carbon  emissions,  means  that  Europe  has  a  unique  responsibility  to  act  in  solidarity  with  those  who  are  displaced.  In  our  free  market  system  only  those  with  certain  papers  such  as  an  EU  passport  and  capital  and  commodities  are  free  to  move  around  the  world.  Those  seeking  a  better  life  or  moving  to  survive  are  increasingly  denied  this  option.  As  well  as  fighting  for  the  conditions  for  people  to  be  able  to  stay  in  their  homes  and  communities,  we  must  also  defend  the  principle  of  freedom  of  movement  for  all  as  one  key  aspect  of  climate  justice.  Energy.  The  need  for  constant  economic  growth  also  means  an  ever  increasing  thirst  for  energy.  While  there  is  sufficient  energy  in  72  Europe  we  see  that  despite  producing  more  and  more  energy,  due  to  inefficiency  and  inequality,  millions  of  people  in  Europe  do  not  have  access  to  affordable  energy  and  are  unable  to  heat  their  homes.  Moreover  our  energy  policy  within  Europe  directly  results  in  huge  amounts  of  dangerous  waste  (nuclear  and  other),  and  vast  levels  of  emissions  which  are  rapidly  destabilising  the  global  climate.  We  must  ensure  that  everyone  in  Europe  has  access  to  sufficient  levels  of  energy  which  is  produced  in  a  way  that  does  not  damage  or  endanger  people  or  the  environment.  We  need  to  radically  transform  our  ways  of  producing,  distributing  and  consuming  energy.  This  means  leaving  fossil  fuels  in  the  ground,  democratising  means  of  production  and  changing  our  attitudes  to  energy  consumption.  Energy  resources  should  be  in  the  control  of  communities  that  use  them,  and  this  means  challenging  the  power  and  ownership  of  energy  companies.  Production  and  consumption.  Europe  has  some  of  the  highest  concentrations  of  wealth  in  the  world  and  consumes  enormous  amounts  of  resources,  yet  there  are  stark  inequalities.  Production  and  consumption  should  be  based  on  values  other  than  profit;  this  means  changing  the  way  we  structure  our  social,  economic  and  political  relationships,  and  ensuring  democratic  control  of  the  means  of  production.  This  will  require  expropriation  and  conversion  not  only  of  climate  damaging  companies  and  industries,  but  all  spheres  of  life  that  operate  according  to  the  logic  of  capital.  We  need  to  challenge  individualism  in  society  and  stop  allowing  ourselves  to  be  defined  as  consumers,  a  de-­‐humanising  and  restrictive  identity.  Social  values  must  be  based  on  human  needs  and  not  on  ever  increasing  consumption,  economic  growth  and  competition.  Climate  Justice  in  Europe.  Climate  justice  means  recognising  that  the  capitalist  growth  paradigm,  which  leads  to  over  extraction,  overproduction  and  overconsumption  stands  in  deep  contrast  to  the  biophysical  limits  of  the  planet  and  the  struggle  for  social  justice.  The  historical  legacy  of  European  expansion/colonialism  is  a  root  cause  of  the  current  geopolitical  inequalities,  in  which  the  global  North  is  consuming  the  global  South.  Climate  justice  means  addressing  the  inequalities  that  exist  between  and  within  countries,  and  replacing  the  economic  and  political  systems  that  uphold  them.  The  status  quo  is  maintained  through  unequal  exchange  via  unjust  trade  policies  and  unequal  access  to  technological  capacity.  On  a  global  level  Europe  is  a  centre  of  capital  accumulation  and  thus  socio-­‐ecological  exploitation  of  the  South,  however,  internally  in  Europe  there  are  huge  inequalities  in  terms  of  race,  gender  and  class.  These  are  crucial  issues  that  need  to  be  addressed  in  the  struggle  for  climate  justice  on  a  European  level.  We  hope  that  this  discussion  paper  has  helped  to  explore  the  concept  of  climate  justice  in  the  context  of  Europe,  and  we  invite  your  comments  to  further  this  discussion.  Fundamentally,  we  believe  that  we  cannot  prevent  further  global  warming  without  addressing  the  way  our  societies  are  organised  –  the  fight  for  climate  justice  and  the  fight  for  social  justice  are  one  and  the  same.  73  World  People’s  Conference  on  Climate  Change  and  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth,  Cochabamba,  April  2010  “People’s  Agreement”  Today,  our  Mother  Earth  is  wounded  and  the  future  of  humanity  is  in  danger.  If  global  warming  increases  by  more  than  2  degrees  Celsius,  a  situation  that  the  “Copenhagen  Accord”  could  lead  to,  there  is  a  50%  probability  that  the  damages  caused  to  our  Mother  Earth  will  be  completely  irreversible.  Between  20%  and  30%  of  species  would  be  in  danger  of  disappearing.  Large  extensions  of  forest  would  be  affected,  droughts  and  floods  would  affect  different  regions  of  the  planet,  deserts  would  expand,  and  the  melting  of  the  polar  ice  caps  and  the  glaciers  in  the  Andes  and  Himalayas  would  worsen.  Many  island  states  would  disappear,  and  Africa  would  suffer  an  increase  in  temperature  of  more  than  3  degrees  Celsius.  Likewise,  the  production  of  food  would  diminish  in  the  world,  causing  catastrophic  impact  on  the  survival  of  inhabitants  from  vast  regions  in  the  planet,  and  the  number  of  people  in  the  world  suffering  from  hunger  would  increase  dramatically,  a  figure  that  already  exceeds  1.02  billion  people.  The  corporations  and  governments  of  the  so-­‐  called  “developed”  countries,  in  complicity  with  a  segment  of  the  scientific  community,  have  led  us  to  discuss  climate  change  as  a  problem  limited  to  the  rise  in  temperature  without  questioning  the  cause,  which  is  the  capitalist  system.  We  confront  the  terminal  crisis  of  a  civilizing  model  that  is  patriarchal  and  based  on  the  submission  and  destruction  of  human  beings  and  nature  that  accelerated  since  the  industrial  revolution.  The  capitalist  system  has  imposed  on  us  a  logic  of  competition,  progress  and  limitless  growth.  This  regime  of  production  and  consumption  seeks  profit  without  limits,  separating  human  beings  from  nature  and  imposing  a  logic  of  domination  upon  nature,  transforming  everything  into  commodities:  water,  earth,  the  human  genome,  ancestral  cultures,  biodiversity,  justice,  ethics,  the  rights  of  peoples,  and  life  itself.  Under  capitalism,  Mother  Earth  is  converted  into  a  source  of  raw  materials,  and  human  beings  into  consumers  and  a  means  of  production,  into  people  that  are  seen  as  valuable  only  for  what  they  own,  and  not  for  what  they  are.  Capitalism  requires  a  powerful  military  industry  for  its  processes  of  accumulation  and  imposition  of  control  over  territories  and  natural  resources,  suppressing  the  resistance  of  the  peoples.  It  is  an  imperialist  system  of  colonization  of  the  planet.  Humanity  confronts  a  great  dilemma:  to  continue  on  the  path  of  capitalism,  depredation,  and  death,  or  to  choose  the  path  of  harmony  with  nature  and  respect  for  life.  It  is  imperative  that  we  forge  a  new  system  that  restores  harmony  with  nature  and  among  human  beings.  And  in  order  for  there  to  be  balance  with  nature,  there  must  first  be  equity  among  human  beings.  We  propose  to  74  the  peoples  of  the  world  the  recovery,  revalorization,  and  strengthening  of  the  knowledge,  wisdom,  and  ancestral  practices  of  Indigenous  Peoples,  which  are  affirmed  in  the  thought  and  practices  of  “Living  Well,”  recognizing  Mother  Earth  as  a  living  being  with  which  we  have  an  indivisible,  interdependent,  complementary  and  spiritual  relationship.  To  face  climate  change,  we  must  recognize  Mother  Earth  as  the  source  of  life  and  forge  a  new  system  based  on  the  principles  of:  –  Harmony  and  balance  among  all  and  with  all  things;  –  Complementarity,  solidarity,  and  equality;  –  Collective  well-­‐being  and  the  satisfaction  of  the  basic  necessities  of  all;  –  People  in  harmony  with  nature;  –  Recognition  of  human  beings  for  what  they  are,  not  what  they  own;  –  Elimination  of  all  forms  of  colonialism,  imperialism  and  interventionism;  –  Peace  among  the  peoples  and  with  Mother  Earth.  The  model  we  support  is  not  a  model  of  limitless  and  destructive  development.  All  countries  need  to  produce  the  goods  and  services  necessary  to  satisfy  the  fundamental  needs  of  their  populations,  but  by  no  means  can  they  continue  to  follow  the  path  of  development  that  has  led  the  richest  countries  to  have  an  ecological  footprint  five  times  bigger  than  what  the  planet  is  able  to  support.  Currently,  the  regenerative  capacity  of  the  planet  has  been  already  exceeded  by  more  than  30  percent.  If  this  pace  of  over-­‐  exploitation  of  our  Mother  Earth  continues,  we  will  need  two  planets  by  the  year  2030.  In  an  interdependent  system  in  which  human  beings  are  only  one  component,  it  is  not  possible  to  recognize  rights  only  to  the  human  part  without  provoking  an  imbalance  in  the  system  as  a  whole.  To  guarantee  human  rights  and  to  restore  harmony  with  nature,  it  is  necessary  to  effectively  recognize  and  apply  the  rights  of  Mother  Earth.  For  this  purpose,  we  propose  the  attached  project  for  the  Universal  Declaration  on  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth,  in  which  it’s  recorded  that:  –  The  right  to  live  and  to  exist;  –  The  right  to  be  respected;  –  The  right  to  regenerate  its  bio-­‐capacity  and  to  continue  its  vital  cycles  and  processes  free  of  human  alteration;  –  The  right  to  maintain  their  identity  and  integrity  as  differentiated  beings,  self-­‐  regulated  and  interrelated;  –  The  right  to  water  as  the  source  of  life;  –  The  right  to  clean  air;  –  The  right  to  comprehensive  health;  –  The  right  to  be  free  of  contamination  and  pollution,  free  of  toxic  and  radioactive  waste;  –  The  right  to  be  free  of  alterations  or  modifications  of  its  genetic  structure  in  a  manner  that  threatens  its  integrity  or  vital  and  healthy  functioning;  –  The  right  to  prompt  and  full  restoration  for  violations  to  the  rights  acknowledged  in  this  Declaration  caused  by  human  activities.  75  The  “shared  vision”  seeks  to  stabilize  the  concentrations  of  greenhouse  gases  to  make  effective  the  Article  2  of  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  which  states  that  “the  stabilization  of  greenhouse  gases  concentrations  in  the  atmosphere  to  a  level  that  prevents  dangerous  anthropogenic  inferences  for  the  climate  system.”  Our  vision  is  based  on  the  principle  of  historical  common  but  differentiated  responsibilities,  to  demand  the  developed  countries  to  commit  with  quantifiable  goals  of  emission  reduction  that  will  allow  to  return  the  concentrations  of  greenhouse  gases  to  300  ppm,  therefore  the  increase  in  the  average  world  temperature  to  a  maximum  of  one  degree  Celsius.  Emphasizing  the  need  for  urgent  action  to  achieve  this  vision,  and  with  the  support  of  peoples,  movements  and  countries,  developed  countries  should  commit  to  ambitious  targets  for  reducing  emissions  that  permit  the  achievement  of  short-­‐term  objectives,  while  maintaining  our  vision  in  favor  of  balance  in  the  Earth’s  climate  system,  in  agreement  with  the  ultimate  objective  of  the  Convention.  The  “shared  vision  for  long-­‐term  cooperative  action”  in  climate  change  negotiations  should  not  be  reduced  to  defining  the  limit  on  temperature  increases  and  the  concentration  of  greenhouse  gases  in  the  atmosphere,  but  must  also  incorporate  in  a  balanced  and  integral  manner  measures  regarding  capacity  building,  production  and  consumption  patterns,  and  other  essential  factors  such  as  the  acknowledging  of  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth  to  establish  harmony  with  nature.  Developed  countries,  as  the  main  cause  of  climate  change,  in  assuming  their  historical  responsibility,  must  recognize  and  honor  their  climate  debt  in  all  of  its  dimensions  as  the  basis  for  a  just,  effective,  and  scientific  solution  to  climate  change.  In  this  context,  we  demand  that  developed  countries:  –  Restore  to  developing  countries  the  atmospheric  space  that  is  occupied  by  their  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  This  implies  the  decolonization  of  the  atmosphere  through  the  reduction  and  absorption  of  their  emissions;  –  Assume  the  costs  and  technology  transfer  needs  of  developing  countries  arising  from  the  loss  of  development  opportunities  due  to  living  in  a  restricted  atmospheric  space;  –  Assume  responsibility  for  the  hundreds  of  millions  of  people  that  will  be  forced  to  migrate  due  to  the  climate  change  caused  by  these  countries,  and  eliminate  their  restrictive  immigration  policies,  offering  migrants  a  decent  life  with  full  human  rights  guarantees  in  their  countries;  –  Assume  adaptation  debt  related  to  the  impacts  of  climate  change  on  developing  countries  by  providing  the  means  to  prevent,  minimize,  and  deal  with  damages  arising  from  their  excessive  emissions;  –  Honor  these  debts  as  part  of  a  broader  debt  to  Mother  Earth  by  adopting  and  implementing  the  United  Nations  Universal  Declaration  on  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth.  The  focus  must  not  be  only  on  financial  compensation,  but  also  on  restorative  justice,  understood  as  the  restitution  of  integrity  to  our  Mother  Earth  and  all  its  beings.  We  deplore  attempts  by  countries  to  annul  the  Kyoto  Protocol,  which  is  the  sole  legally  binding  instrument  specific  to  the  reduction  76  of  greenhouse  gas  emissions  by  developed  countries.  We  inform  the  world  that,  despite  their  obligation  to  reduce  emissions,  developed  countries  have  increased  their  emissions  by  11.2%  in  the  period  from  1990  to  2007.  During  that  same  period,  due  to  unbridled  consumption,  the  United  States  of  America  has  increased  its  greenhouse  gas  emissions  by  16.8%,  reaching  an  average  of  20  to  23  tons  of  CO2  per-­‐person.  This  represents  9  times  more  than  that  of  the  average  inhabitant  of  the  “Third  World,”  and  20  times  more  than  that  of  the  average  inhabitant  of  Sub-­‐Saharan  Africa.  We  categorically  reject  the  illegitimate  “Copenhagen  Accord”  that  allows  developed  countries  to  offer  insufficient  reductions  in  greenhouse  gases  based  in  voluntary  and  individual  commitments,  violating  the  environmental  integrity  of  Mother  Earth  and  leading  us  toward  an  increase  in  global  temperatures  of  around  4°C.  The  next  Conference  on  Climate  Change  to  be  held  at  the  end  of  2010  in  Mexico  should  approve  an  amendment  to  the  Kyoto  Protocol  for  the  second  commitment  period  from  2013  to  2017  under  which  developed  countries  must  agree  to  significant  domestic  emissions  reductions  of  at  least  50%  based  on  1990  levels,  excluding  carbon  markets  or  other  offset  mechanisms  that  mask  the  failure  of  actual  reductions  in  greenhouse  gas  emissions.  We  require  first  of  all  the  establishment  of  a  goal  for  the  group  of  developed  countries  to  achieve  the  assignment  of  individual  commitments  for  each  developed  country  under  the  framework  of  complementary  efforts  among  each  one,  maintaining  in  this  way  Kyoto  Protocol  as  the  route  to  emissions  reductions.  The  United  States,  as  the  only  Annex  1  country  on  Earth  that  did  not  ratify  the  Kyoto  Protocol,  has  a  significant  responsibility  toward  all  peoples  of  the  world  to  ratify  this  document  and  commit  itself  to  respecting  and  complying  with  emissions  reduction  targets  on  a  scale  appropriate  to  the  total  size  of  its  economy.  We  the  peoples  have  the  equal  right  to  be  protected  from  the  adverse  effects  of  climate  change  and  reject  the  notion  of  adaptation  to  climate  change  as  understood  as  a  resignation  to  impacts  provoked  by  the  historical  emissions  of  developed  countries,  which  themselves  must  adapt  their  modes  of  life  and  consumption  in  the  face  of  this  global  emergency.  We  see  it  as  imperative  to  confront  the  adverse  effects  of  climate  change,  and  consider  adaptation  to  be  a  process  rather  than  an  imposition,  as  well  as  a  tool  that  can  serve  to  help  offset  those  effects,  demonstrating  that  it  is  possible  to  achieve  harmony  with  nature  under  a  different  model  for  living.  It  is  necessary  to  construct  an  Adaptation  Fund  exclusively  for  addressing  climate  change  as  part  of  a  financial  mechanism  that  is  managed  in  a  sovereign,  transparent,  and  equitable  manner  for  all  States.  This  Fund  should  assess  the  impacts  and  costs  of  climate  change  in  developing  countries  and  needs  deriving  from  these  impacts,  and  monitor  support  on  the  part  of  developed  countries.  It  should  also  include  a  mechanism  for  compensation  for  current  and  future  damages,  loss  of  opportunities  due  to  extreme  and  gradual  climactic  events,  and  additional  costs  that  could  present  77  themselves  if  our  planet  surpasses  ecological  thresholds,  such  as  those  impacts  that  present  obstacles  to  “Living  Well.”  The  “Copenhagen  Accord”  imposed  on  developing  countries  by  a  few  States,  beyond  simply  offering  insufficient  resources,  attempts  as  well  to  divide  and  create  confrontation  between  peoples  and  to  extort  developing  countries  by  placing  conditions  on  access  to  adaptation  and  mitigation  resources.  We  also  assert  as  unacceptable  the  attempt  in  processes  of  international  negotiation  to  classify  developing  countries  for  their  vulnerability  to  climate  change,  generating  disputes,  inequalities  and  segregation  among  them.  The  immense  challenge  humanity  faces  of  stopping  global  warming  and  cooling  the  planet  can  only  be  achieved  through  a  profound  shift  in  agricultural  practices  toward  the  sustainable  model  of  production  used  by  indigenous  and  rural  farming  peoples,  as  well  as  other  ancestral  models  and  practices  that  contribute  to  solving  the  problem  of  agriculture  and  food  sovereignty.  This  is  understood  as  the  right  of  peoples  to  control  their  own  seeds,  lands,  water,  and  food  production,  thereby  guaranteeing,  through  forms  of  production  that  are  in  harmony  with  Mother  Earth  and  appropriate  to  local  cultural  contexts,  access  to  sufficient,  varied  and  nutritious  foods  in  complementarity  with  Mother  Earth  and  deepening  the  autonomous  (participatory,  communal  and  shared)  production  of  every  nation  and  people.  Climate  change  is  now  producing  profound  impacts  on  agriculture  and  the  ways  of  life  of  indigenous  peoples  and  farmers  throughout  the  world,  and  these  impacts  will  worsen  in  the  future.  Agribusiness,  through  its  social,  economic,  and  cultural  model  of  global  capitalist  production  and  its  logic  of  producing  food  for  the  market  and  not  to  fulfill  the  right  to  proper  nutrition,  is  one  of  the  principal  causes  of  climate  change.  Its  technological,  commercial,  and  political  approach  only  serves  to  deepen  the  climate  change  crisis  and  increase  hunger  in  the  world.  For  this  reason,  we  reject  Free  Trade  Agreements  and  Association  Agreements  and  all  forms  of  the  application  of  Intellectual  Property  Rights  to  life,  current  technological  packages  (agrochemicals,  genetic  modification)  and  those  that  offer  false  solutions  (biofuels,  geo-­‐  engineering,  nanotechnology,  etc.)  that  only  exacerbate  the  current  crisis.  We  similarly  denounce  the  way  in  which  the  capitalist  model  imposes  mega-­‐infrastructure  projects  and  invades  territories  with  extractive  projects,  water  privatization,  and  militarized  territories,  expelling  indigenous  peoples  from  their  lands,  inhibiting  food  sovereignty  and  deepening  socio-­‐  environmental  crisis.  We  demand  recognition  of  the  right  of  all  peoples,  living  beings,  and  Mother  Earth  to  have  access  to  water,  and  we  support  the  proposal  of  the  Government  of  Bolivia  to  recognize  water  as  a  Fundamental  Human  Right.  The  definition  of  forests  used  in  the  negotiations  of  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change,  which  includes  plantations,  is  unacceptable.  Monoculture  plantations  are  not  forests.  Therefore,  we  require  a  definition  for  negotiation  purposes  that  recognizes  the  native  forests,  jungles  and  the  diverse  ecosystems  on  Earth.  78  The  United  Nations  Declaration  on  the  Rights  of  Indigenous  Peoples  must  be  fully  recognized,  implemented  and  integrated  in  climate  change  negotiations.  The  best  strategy  and  action  to  avoid  deforestation  and  degradation  and  protect  native  forests  and  jungles  is  to  recognize  and  guarantee  collective  rights  to  lands  and  territories,  especially  considering  that  most  of  the  forests  are  located  within  the  territories  of  indigenous  peoples  and  nations  and  other  traditional  communities.  We  condemn  market  mechanisms  such  as  REDD  (Reducing  Emissions  from  Deforestation  and  Forest  Degradation)  and  its  versions  +  and  +  +,  which  are  violating  the  sovereignty  of  peoples  and  their  right  to  prior  free  and  informed  consent  as  well  as  the  sovereignty  of  national  States,  the  customs  of  Peoples,  and  the  Rights  of  Nature.  Polluting  countries  have  an  obligation  to  carry  out  direct  transfers  of  the  economic  and  technological  resources  needed  to  pay  for  the  restoration  and  maintenance  of  forests  in  favor  of  the  peoples  and  indigenous  ancestral  organic  structures.  Compensation  must  be  direct  and  in  addition  to  the  sources  of  funding  promised  by  developed  countries  outside  of  the  carbon  market,  and  never  serve  as  carbon  offsets.  We  demand  that  countries  stop  actions  on  local  forests  based  on  market  mechanisms  and  propose  non-­‐  existent  and  conditional  results.  We  call  on  governments  to  create  a  global  program  to  restore  native  forests  and  jungles,  managed  and  administered  by  the  peoples,  implementing  forest  seeds,  fruit  trees,  and  native  flora.  Governments  should  eliminate  forest  concessions  and  support  the  conservation  of  petroleum  deposits  in  the  ground  and  urgently  stop  the  exploitation  of  hydrocarbons  in  forestlands.  We  call  upon  States  to  recognize,  respect  and  guarantee  the  effective  implementation  of  international  human  rights  standards  and  the  rights  of  indigenous  peoples,  including  the  United  Nations  Declaration  on  the  Rights  of  Indigenous  Peoples  under  ILO  Convention  169,  among  other  relevant  instruments  in  the  negotiations,  policies  and  measures  used  to  meet  the  challenges  posed  by  climate  change.  In  particular,  we  call  upon  States  to  give  legal  recognition  to  claims  over  territories,  lands  and  natural  resources  to  enable  and  strengthen  our  traditional  ways  of  life  and  contribute  effectively  to  solving  climate  change.  We  demand  the  full  and  effective  implementation  of  the  right  to  consultation,  participation  and  prior,  free  and  informed  consent  of  indigenous  peoples  in  all  negotiation  processes,  and  in  the  design  and  implementation  of  measures  related  to  climate  change.  Environmental  degradation  and  climate  change  are  currently  reaching  critical  levels,  and  one  of  the  main  consequences  of  this  is  domestic  and  international  migration.  According  to  projections,  there  were  already  about  25  million  climate  migrants  by  1995.  Current  estimates  are  around  50  million,  and  projections  suggest  that  between  200  million  and  1  billion  people  will  become  displaced  by  situations  resulting  from  climate  change  by  the  year  2050.  Developed  countries  should  assume  responsibility  for  climate  migrants,  welcoming  them  into  their  territories  and  recognizing  their  fundamental  rights  through  the  signing  of  international  conventions  that  provide  for  the  definition  of  climate  migrant  79  and  require  all  States  to  abide  by  abide  by  determinations.  Establish  an  International  Tribunal  of  Conscience  to  denounce,  make  visible,  document,  judge  and  punish  violations  of  the  rights  of  migrants,  refugees  and  displaced  persons  within  countries  of  origin,  transit  and  destination,  clearly  identifying  the  responsibilities  of  States,  companies  and  other  agents.  Current  funding  directed  toward  developing  countries  for  climate  change  and  the  proposal  of  the  Copenhagen  Accord  are  insignificant.  In  addition  to  Official  Development  Assistance  and  public  sources,  developed  countries  must  commit  to  a  new  annual  funding  of  at  least  6%  of  GDP  to  tackle  climate  change  in  developing  countries.  This  is  viable  considering  that  a  similar  amount  is  spent  on  national  defense,  and  that  5  times  more  have  been  put  forth  to  rescue  failing  banks  and  speculators,  which  raises  serious  questions  about  global  priorities  and  political  will.  This  funding  should  be  direct  and  free  of  conditions,  and  should  not  interfere  with  the  national  sovereignty  or  self-­‐determination  of  the  most  affected  communities  and  groups.  In  view  of  the  inefficiency  of  the  current  mechanism,  a  new  funding  mechanism  should  be  established  at  the  2010  Climate  Change  Conference  in  Mexico,  functioning  under  the  authority  of  the  Conference  of  the  Parties  (COP)  under  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  and  held  accountable  to  it,  with  significant  representation  of  developing  countries,  to  ensure  compliance  with  the  funding  commitments  of  Annex  1  countries.  It  has  been  stated  that  developed  countries  significantly  increased  their  emissions  in  the  period  from  1990  to  2007,  despite  having  stated  that  the  reduction  would  be  substantially  supported  by  market  mechanisms.  The  carbon  market  has  become  a  lucrative  business,  commodifying  our  Mother  Earth.  It  is  therefore  not  an  alternative  for  tackle  climate  change,  as  it  loots  and  ravages  the  land,  water,  and  even  life  itself.  The  recent  financial  crisis  has  demonstrated  that  the  market  is  incapable  of  regulating  the  financial  system,  which  is  fragile  and  uncertain  due  to  speculation  and  the  emergence  of  intermediary  brokers.  Therefore,  it  would  be  totally  irresponsible  to  leave  in  their  hands  the  care  and  protection  of  human  existence  and  of  our  Mother  Earth.  We  consider  inadmissible  that  current  negotiations  propose  the  creation  of  new  mechanisms  that  extend  and  promote  the  carbon  market,  for  existing  mechanisms  have  not  resolved  the  problem  of  climate  change  nor  led  to  real  and  direct  actions  to  reduce  greenhouse  gases.  It  is  necessary  to  demand  fulfillment  of  the  commitments  assumed  by  developed  countries  under  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  regarding  development  and  technology  transfer,  and  to  reject  the  “technology  showcase”  proposed  by  developed  countries  that  only  markets  technology.  It  is  essential  to  establish  guidelines  in  order  to  create  a  multilateral  and  multidisciplinary  mechanism  for  participatory  control,  management,  and  evaluation  of  the  exchange  of  technologies.  These  technologies  must  be  useful,  clean  and  socially  sound.  Likewise,  it  is  fundamental  to  establish  a  fund  for  the  financing  and  inventory  of  technologies  that  are  appropriate  and  free  of  intellectual  property  80  rights.  Patents,  in  particular,  should  move  from  the  hands  of  private  monopolies  to  the  public  domain  in  order  to  promote  accessibility  and  low  costs.  Knowledge  is  universal,  and  should  for  no  reason  be  the  object  of  private  property  or  private  use,  nor  should  its  application  in  the  form  of  technology.  Developed  countries  have  a  responsibility  to  share  their  technology  with  developing  countries,  to  build  research  centers  in  developing  countries  for  the  creation  of  technologies  and  innovations,  and  defend  and  promote  their  development  and  application  for  “living  well.”  The  world  must  recover  and  re-­‐learn  ancestral  principles  and  approaches  from  native  peoples  to  stop  the  destruction  of  the  planet,  as  well  as  promote  ancestral  practices,  knowledge  and  spirituality  to  recuperate  the  capacity  for  “living  well”  in  harmony  with  Mother  Earth.  Considering  the  lack  of  political  will  on  the  part  of  developed  countries  to  effectively  comply  with  commitments  and  obligations  assumed  under  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  and  the  Kyoto  Protocol,  and  given  the  lack  of  a  legal  international  organism  to  guard  against  and  sanction  climate  and  environmental  crimes  that  violate  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth  and  humanity,  we  demand  the  creation  of  an  International  Climate  and  Environmental  Justice  Tribunal  that  has  the  legal  capacity  to  prevent,  judge  and  penalize  States,  industries  and  people  that  by  commission  or  omission  contaminate  and  provoke  climate  change.  Supporting  States  that  present  claims  at  the  International  Climate  and  Environmental  Justice  Tribunal  against  developed  countries  that  fail  to  comply  with  commitments  under  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change  and  the  Kyoto  Protocol  including  commitments  to  reduce  greenhouse  gases.  We  urge  peoples  to  propose  and  promote  deep  reform  within  the  United  Nations,  so  that  all  member  States  comply  with  the  decisions  of  the  International  Climate  and  Environmental  Justice  Tribunal.  The  future  of  humanity  is  in  danger,  and  we  cannot  allow  a  group  of  leaders  from  developed  countries  to  decide  for  all  countries  as  they  tried  unsuccessfully  to  do  at  the  Conference  of  the  Parties  in  Copenhagen.  This  decision  concerns  us  all.  Thus,  it  is  essential  to  carry  out  a  global  referendum  or  popular  consultation  on  climate  change  in  which  all  are  consulted  regarding  the  following  issues;  the  level  of  emission  reductions  on  the  part  of  developed  countries  and  transnational  corporations,  financing  to  be  offered  by  developed  countries,  the  creation  of  an  International  Climate  Justice  Tribunal,  the  need  for  a  Universal  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth,  and  the  need  to  change  the  current  capitalist  system.  The  process  of  a  global  referendum  or  popular  consultation  will  depend  on  process  of  preparation  that  ensures  the  successful  development  of  the  same.  In  order  to  coordinate  our  international  action  and  implement  the  results  of  this  “Accord  of  the  Peoples,”  we  call  for  the  building  of  a  Global  People’s  Movement  for  Mother  Earth,  which  should  be  based  on  the  principles  of  complementarity  and  respect  for  the  diversity  of  origin  and  visions  among  its  members,  constituting  a  broad  and  democratic  space  for  coordination  and  joint  worldwide  actions.  81  To  this  end,  we  adopt  the  attached  global  plan  of  action  so  that  in  Mexico,  the  developed  countries  listed  in  Annex  1  respect  the  existing  legal  framework  and  reduce  their  greenhouse  gases  emissions  by  50%,  and  that  the  different  proposals  contained  in  this  Agreement  are  adopted.  Finally,  we  agree  to  undertake  a  Second  World  People’s  Conference  on  Climate  Change  and  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth  in  2011  as  part  of  this  process  of  building  the  Global  People’s  Movement  for  Mother  Earth  and  reacting  to  the  outcomes  of  the  Climate  Change  Conference  to  be  held  at  the  end  of  this  year  in  Cancún,  Mexico  [i].  Durban  Meeting  Signatories:  Carbon  Trade  Watch;  Indigenous  Environmental  Network;  Climate  &  Development  Initiatives,  Uganda;  Coecoceiba-­‐Amigos  de  la  Tierra,  Costa  Rica;  CORE  Centre  for  Organisation  Research  &  Education,  Manipur,  India;  Delhi  Forum,  India;  Earthlife  Africa  (ELA)  eThekwini  Branch,  South  Africa;  FERN,  EU;  FASE-­‐ES/Green  Desert  Network  Brazil;  Global  Justice  Ecology  Project,  USA;  groundwork,  South  Africa;  National  Forum  of  Forest  People  And  Forest  Workers(NFFPFW),  India;  Patrick  Bond,  Professor,  University  of  KwaZulu-­‐Natal  School  of  Development  Studies,  South  Africa;  O  le  Siosiomaga  Society,  Samoa;  South  Durban  Community  Alliance  (SDCEA),  South  Africa;  Sustainable  Energy  &  Economy  Network,  USA;  The  Corner  House,  UK;  Timberwatch  Coalition,  South  Africa;  World  Rainforest  Movement,  Uruguay.  Supporting  organisational  signatories:  50  Years  Is  Enough:  U.S.  Network  for  Global  Economic  Justice,  USA;  Aficafiles,  Canada;  Africa  Groups  of  Sweden,  Sweden;  Alianza  Verde,  Honduras;  Ambiente  y  Sociedad,  Argentina;  Angikar  Bangladesh  Foundation,  Bangladesh;  Anisa  Colombia,  Colombia;  Asociacion  Alternativa  Ambiental,  Spain;  Asociacion  Amigos  Reserva  Yaguaroundi,  Argentina;  Asociacion  de  Guardaparques  Argentinos,  Argentina;  Asociación  Ecologista  Piuke,  Argentina;  Asociacion  para  la  Defensa  del  Medio  Ambiente  del  Noreste  Santafesino,  Argentina;  Asociación  San  Francisco  de  Asís,  Argentina;  Association  France  Amerique  Latine,  France;  Associacion  Lihue  San  Carlos  de  Barloche  /  Rio  Negro,  Argentina;  Association  pour  un  contrat  mondial  de  l’eau,  Comité  de  Seine  Saint  Denis,  France;  Associação  Caeté  –  Cultura  e  Natureza,  Brasil;  Athlone  Park  Residents  Association,  South  Africa;  Austerville  Clinic  Committee,  South  Africa;  Australian  Greens,  Australia;  Aukland  Rising  Tide,  New  Zealand;  BanglaPraxis,  Bangladesh;  Benjamin  E.  Mays  Center,  USA;  Bluff  Ridge  Conservancy  (BRC),  South  Africa;  BOA,  Venezuela;  Boulder  Environmental  Activists  Resource,  Rocky  Mountain;  Peace  and  Justice  Center,  USA;  The  Bread  of  Life  Development  Foundation,  Nigeria;  CENSAT-­‐  Friends  of  the  Earth  Colombia,  Colombia;  Center  for  Economic  Justice,  USA;  Centre  for  Environmental  Justice,  Sri  Lanka;  Center  for  Environmental  Law  and  Community  Rights  Inc./;  Friends  of  the  Earth  (PNG),  Papua  New  Guinea;  Center  for  Urban  Transformation,  USA;  Centro  de  Derecho  Ambientaly  Promoción  para  el  Desarrollo  (CEDAPRODE),  Nicaragua;  Centro  de  Investigacion  Cientifica  de  Yucatan  A.C.,  Mexico;  Committee  in  Solidarity  with  the  People  of  El  Salvador,  USA;  Christ  the  King  Church  Group,  South  Africa;  Clairwood  Ratepayers  Association  (CRA),  South  Africa;  Cold  Mountain,  Cold  Rivers,  USA;  Colectivo  de  Proyectos  Alternativos  de  México  (COPAL),  Mexico;  Colectivo  MadreSelva,  Guatemala;  Comité  de  Análisis  82  ‘Ana  Silvia  Olán’  de  Sonsonate  –  CANASO,  El  Salvador;  Committee  in  Solidarity  with  the  People  of  El  Salvador,  USA;  Community  Health  Cell,  Bangalore,  India;  Corporate  Europe  Observatory  (CEO),  Netherlands;  C.P.E.M.  Nº29-­‐Ciencias  Ambientales,  Argentina;  Del  Consejo  de  Organisaciones  de  Médicos  y  Parteras  Indígenas  Tradicionales  de  Chiapas,  Mexico;  Enda  América  Latina,  Colombia;  ECOGRAIN,  Spain;  Ecoisla,  Puerto  Rica;  EarthLink  e.V.-­‐The  People  &  Nature  Network,  Germany;  Ecological  Society  of  the  Philippines,  Philippines;  Ecologistas  en  Acción,  Spain;  Ecoportal.net,  Argentina;  ECOTERRA  International;  El  Centro  de  Ecología  y  Excursionismo  de  la  Universidad  de  Carabobo,  Venezuela;  Els  Verds  –  Alternativa  Verda,  Spain;  Environment  Desk  of  Images  Asia,  Thailand;  FASE  Gurupá,  Brasil;  Forest  Peoples  Programme,  UK;  Foundation  for  Grassroots  Initiatives  in  Africa,  Ghana;  Friends  of  the  Earth  International;  Friends  of  the  Earth  Australia,  Australia;  Friends  of  the  Siberian  Forests,  Russia;  FSC-­‐Brasil,  Brasil;  Fundación  Argentina  de  Etoecología  (FAE),  Argentina;  Fundación  Los  de  Tilquiza,  proyecto  AGUAVERDE,  Argentina;  Groupe  d’Etudes  et  de  Recherche  sure  les  Energies  Renouvelables  et  l’Environnement  (GERERE),  Morocco;  Gruppo  di  Volontariato  Civile  (GVC-­‐  Italia),  oficina  de  Nicaragua,  Nicaragua;  House  of  Worship,  South  Africa;  Indigenous  Peoples’  Biodiversity  Network,  Peru;  InfoNature,  Portugal;  Infringement  Festival,  Canada;  Iniciativa  ArcoIris  de  Ecologia  y  Sociedad,  Argentina;  Iniciativa  Radial,  Argentina;  Institute  for  Social  Ecology  Biotechnology  Project,  USA;  Instituto  Ecoar  para  Cidadania,  Brasil;  Instituto  Igaré,  Brasil;  International  Fund  for  Animal  Welfare  (IFAW),  Belgium;  International  Indian  Treaty  Council;  Isipingo  Environmental  Committee  (IEC),  South  Africa;  Isipingo  Ratepayers  Association,  South  Africa;  Jeunesse  Horizon,  Camerun;  JKPP  /Indonesian  Community  Mapping  Network,  Indonesia;  Joint  Action  Committee  of  Isipingo  (JACI),  South  Africa;  KVW  Translations,  Spain;  LOKOJ,  Bangladesh;  London  Rising  Tide,  UK;  Malvarrosamedia,  Spain;  Mangrove  Action  Project  (MAP),  USA;  Mano  Verde,  Colombia;  Mercy  International  Justice  Network,  Kenya;  Merebank  Clinic  Committee  (MCC),  South  Africa;  Movimiento  por  la  Paz  y  el  Ambiente,  Argentina;  Movimento  por  los  Derechos  y  la  Consulta  Ciudadana,  Chile;  Nicaragua  Center  for  Community  Action,  USA;  Nicaragua  Network  (US),  USA;  Nicaragua-­‐US  Friendship  Office,  USA;  NOAH-­‐Friends  of  the  Earth  Denmark,  Denmark;  Núcleo  Amigos  da  Terra,  Brasil;  Ogoni  Rescue  Patriotic  Fund,  Nigeria;  Oilwatch  International,  Ecuador;  Oilwatch  Africa,  Nigeria;  Organisacion  Fraternal  Negra  Honduirena,  Honduras;  Parque  Provincial  Ernesto  Tornquist,  Argentina;  Pacific  Indigenous  Peoples  Environment  Coalition  (PIPEC),Aotearoa/New  Zealand;  Pesticides  Action  Network  Latin  America,  Uruguay;  Piedad  Espinoza  Trópico  Verde,  Guatemala;  PovoAção,  Brasil;  Prideaux  Consulting,  USA;  Projeto  tudo  Sobre  Plantas  –  Jornal  SOS  Verde,  Brasil;  Public  Citizen,  USA;  Rainforest  Action  Network,  USA;  Rainy  River  First  Nations,  Canada;  Reclaim  the  Commons,  USA;  Red  de  Agricultura  Orgánica  de  Misiones,  Argentina;  REDES-­‐Amigos  de  la  Tierra,  Uruguay;  Red  Verde,  Spain;  Rettet  den  Regenwald,  Germany;  Rising  Tide,  UK;  Sahabat  Alam  Malaysia  /FOE-­‐Malaysia,  Malaysia;  San  Francisco  Bay  Area  Jubilee  Debt  Cancellation  Coalition,  USA;  Scottish  Education  and  Action  for  Development,  UK;  S.G.Fiber,  Pakistan;  Silverglen  Civic  Association  (SCA),  South  Africa;  Sisters  of  the  Holy  Cross  –  Congregation  Justice  Committee,  USA;  Sobrevivencia,  Friends  of  the  Earth  Paraguay,  Paraguay;  Sociedad  Civil,  Mexico;  SOLJUSPAX,  Philippines;  Tebtebba  Foundation,  Philippines;  The  Sawmill  River  83  Watershed  Alliance,  USA;  TRAPESE  –  Take  Radical  Action  Through  Popular  Education  and  Sustainable  Everything,  UK  /  Spain;  Treasure  Beach  Environmental  Forum  (TBEF),  South  Africa;  Uganda  Coalition  for  Sustainable  Development,  Uganda;  Ujamaa  Community  Resource  Trust  (UCRT),  Tanzania;  UNICA,  Nicaragua;  Union  Chrétienne  pour  l’Education  et  Développement  des  Déshérités  (UCEDD),  Burundi;  Union  Mexicana  de  Emprendedores  Inios,  A.  C.,  Mexico;  VALL  DE  CAN  MASDEU,  Spain;  Wentworth  Development  Forum  (WDF),  South  Africa;  Western  Nebraska  Resources  Council,  USA;  World  Bank  Boycott/Center  for  Economic  Justice,  USA;  worldforests,  UK;  World  Peace  Prayer  Society,  USA.  [ii].  Carbon  Trade  Watch,  Transnational  Institute;  Center  for  Environmental  Concerns;  Focus  on  the  Global  South;  Freedom  from  Debt  Coalition,  Philippines;  Friends  of  the  Earth  International;  Gendercc  –  Women  for  Climate  Justice,  Global  Forest  Coalition;  Global  Justice  Ecology  Project;  International  Forum  on  Globalization;  Kalikasan-­‐Peoples  Network  for  the  Environment  (Kalikasan-­‐  PNE);  La  Vía  Campesina;  members  of  the  Durban  Group  for  Climate  Justice;  Oilwatch;  Pacific  Indigenous  Peoples  Environment  Coalition,  Aotearoa/New  Zealand;  Sustainable  Energy  and  Economy  Network;  The  Indigenous  Environmental  Network;  Third  World  Network;  WALHI/  Friends  of  the  Earth  Indonesia;  World  Rainforest  Movement.  84  Universal  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth,  Cochabamba,  April  27,  2010  This  Declaration  was  adopted  by  the  World  People’s  Conference  on  Climate  Change  and  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth,  in  Bolivia.  The  Bolivian  government  has  submitted  it  to  the  United  Nations  for  consideration.  Preamble  We,  the  peoples  and  nations  of  Earth:  considering  that  we  are  all  part  of  Mother  Earth,  an  indivisible,  living  community  of  interrelated  and  interdependent  beings  with  a  common  destiny;  gratefully  acknowledging  that  Mother  Earth  is  the  source  of  life,  nourishment  and  learning  and  provides  everything  we  need  to  live  well;  recognizing  that  the  capitalist  system  and  all  forms  of  depredation,  exploitation,  abuse  and  contamination  have  caused  great  destruction,  degradation  and  disruption  of  Mother  Earth,  putting  life  as  we  know  it  today  at  risk  through  phenomena  such  as  climate  change;  convinced  that  in  an  interdependent  living  community  it  is  not  possible  to  recognize  the  rights  of  only  human  beings  without  causing  an  imbalance  within  Mother  Earth;  affirming  that  to  guarantee  human  rights  it  is  necessary  to  recognize  and  defend  the  rights  of  Mother  Earth  and  all  beings  in  her  and  that  there  are  existing  cultures,  practices  and  laws  that  do  so;  conscious  of  the  urgency  of  taking  decisive,  collective  action  to  transform  structures  and  systems  that  cause  climate  change  and  other  threats  to  Mother  Earth;  proclaim  this  Universal  Declaration  of  the  Rights  of  Mother  Earth,  and  call  on  the  General  Assembly  of  the  United  Nation  to  adopt  it,  as  a  common  standard  of  achievement  for  all  peoples  and  all  nations  of  the  world,  and  to  the  end  that  every  individual  and  institution  takes  responsibility  for  promoting  through  teaching,  education,  and  consciousness  raising,  respect  for  the  rights  recognized  in  this  Declaration  and  ensure  through  prompt  and  progressive  measures  and  mechanisms,  national  and  international,  their  universal  and  effective  recognition  and  observance  among  all  peoples  and  States  in  the  world.  Article  1.  Mother  Earth  (1)  Mother  Earth  is  a  living  being.  (2)  Mother  Earth  is  a  unique,  indivisible,  self-­‐  regulating  community  of  interrelated  beings  that  sustains,  contains  and  reproduces  all  beings.  (3)  Each  being  is  defined  by  its  relationships  as  an  integral  part  of  Mother  Earth.  (4)  The  inherent  rights  of  Mother  Earth  are  inalienable  in  that  they  arise  from  the  same  source  as  existence.  (5)  Mother  Earth  and  all  beings  are  entitled  to  all  the  inherent  rights  recognized  in  this  Declaration  without  distinction  of  any  kind,  such  as  may  be  made  between  organic  and  inorganic  beings,  species,  origin,  use  to  human  beings,  or  any  other  status.  (6)  Just  as  human  beings  have  human  rights,  all  other  beings  also  have  rights  which  are  specific  to  their  species  or  kind  and  appropriate  for  their  role  and  function  within  the  communities  within  which  they  exist.  (7)  The  rights  of  each  being  are  limited  by  the  rights  of  other  beings  and  any  conflict  85  between  their  rights  must  be  resolved  in  a  way  that  maintains  the  integrity,  balance  and  health  of  Mother  Earth.  Article  2.  Inherent  Rights  of  Mother  Earth  (1)  Mother  Earth  and  all  beings  of  which  she  is  composed  have  the  following  inherent  rights:  (a)  the  right  to  life  and  to  exist;  (b)  the  right  to  be  respected;  (c)  the  right  to  regenerate  its  bio-­‐capacity  and  to  continue  its  vital  cycles  and  processes  free  from  human  disruptions;  (d)  the  right  to  maintain  its  identity  and  integrity  as  a  distinct,  self-­‐regulating  and  interrelated  being;  (e)  the  right  to  water  as  a  source  of  life;  (f)  the  right  to  clean  air;  (g)  the  right  to  integral  health;  (h)  the  right  to  be  free  from  contamination,  pollution  and  toxic  or  radioactive  waste;  (i)  the  right  to  not  have  its  genetic  structure  modified  or  disrupted  in  a  manner  that  threatens  it  integrity  or  vital  and  healthy  functioning;  (j)  the  right  to  full  and  prompt  restoration  the  violation  of  the  rights  recognized  in  this  Declaration  caused  by  human  activities;  (2)  Each  being  has  the  right  to  a  place  and  to  play  its  role  in  Mother  Earth  for  her  harmonious  functioning.  (3)  Every  being  has  the  right  to  wellbeing  and  to  live  free  from  torture  or  cruel  treatment  by  human  beings.  Article  3.  Obligations  of  human  beings  to  Mother  Earth  (1)  Every  human  being  is  responsible  for  respecting  and  living  in  harmony  with  Mother  Earth.  (2)  Human  beings,  all  States,  and  all  public  and  private  institutions  must:  (a)  act  in  accordance  with  the  rights  and  obligations  recognized  in  this  Declaration;  (b)  recognize  and  promote  the  full  implementation  and  enforcement  of  the  rights  and  obligations  recognized  in  this  Declaration;  (c)  promote  and  participate  in  learning,  analysis,  interpretation  and  communication  about  how  to  live  in  harmony  with  Mother  Earth  in  accordance  with  this  Declaration;  (d)  ensure  that  the  pursuit  of  human  wellbeing  contributes  to  the  wellbeing  of  Mother  Earth,  now  and  in  the  future;  (e)  establish  and  apply  effective  norms  and  laws  for  the  defence,  protection  and  conservation  of  the  rights  of  Mother  Earth;  (f)  respect,  protect,  conserve  and  where  necessary,  restore  the  integrity,  of  the  vital  ecological  cycles,  processes  and  balances  of  Mother  Earth;  (g)  guarantee  that  the  damages  caused  by  human  violations  of  the  inherent  rights  recognized  in  this  Declaration  are  rectified  and  that  those  responsible  are  held  accountable  for  restoring  the  integrity  and  health  of  Mother  Earth;  (h)  empower  human  beings  and  institutions  to  defend  the  rights  of  Mother  Earth  and  of  all  beings;  (i)  establish  precautionary  and  restrictive  measures  to  prevent  human  activities  from  causing  species  extinction,  the  destruction  of  ecosystems  or  the  disruption  of  ecological  cycles;  (j)  guarantee  peace  and  eliminate  nuclear,  chemical  and  biological  weapons;  (k)  promote  and  support  practices  of  respect  for  Mother  Earth  and  all  beings,  in  accordance  with  their  own  cultures,  traditions  and  customs;  (l)  promote  economic  systems  that  are  in  harmony  with  Mother  Earth  and  in  accordance  with  the  rights  recognized  in  this  Declaration.  86  Article  4.  Definitions  (1)  The  term  “being”  includes  ecosystems,  natural  communities,  species  and  all  other  natural  entities  which  exist  as  part  of  Mother  Earth.  (2)  Nothing  in  this  Declaration  restricts  the  recognition  of  other  inherent  rights  of  all  beings  or  specified  beings.  87  The  Margarita  Declaration  on  Climate  Change  Preparatory  Meeting,  Venezuela,  July  18,  2014,  Margarita  Island,  Social  PreCOP  Changing  the  system,  not  the  climate    es/archivos/margarita_declaration_on_climat  e_change.pdf  We,  women  and  men  representing  social  movements  and  organizations,  gathered  in  Margarita  Island  from  July  15th  thru  18th,  2014,  committed  to  the  Good  Living,  in  harmony  with  the  ecosystems  of  the  Earth  as  a  way  to  counteract  the  current  environmental  crisis  and  the  climate  change,  one  of  its  most  ferocious  faces;  concerned  by  the  social  dimension  of  this  crisis  that  has  been  ignored  for  long,  but  filled  with  hope  and  faith  in  the  creating  powers  of  the  peoples  as  the  necessary  driving  force  to  achieve  substantial  changes  in  the  system;  salute  and  welcome  the  social  processes  that  are  being  lived  and  constructed  in  various  countries,  communities  and  model  societies.  Whereas,  there  is  a  social  dimension  of  the  climate  change  and  an  unalienable  right  of  the  peoples  to  be  the  protagonists  in  the  construction  of  their  own  destinies;  Whereas,  each  country  lives  in  a  particular  historic  context  within  a  complex  world  made  up  by  diversity  of  experiences  and  visions  from  which  transformational  initiatives  rise;  Whereas,  the  climate  crisis  results  from  unsustainable  development  systems  that  are  incompatible  with  the  happiness  of  the  peoples;  Whereas,  the  environment  is  a  political  issue  and  it  is  the  duty  of  the  governments  and  the  multilateral  system  to  hear  the  voices  of  the  peoples;  Whereas,  the  peoples  endure  the  consequences  of  the  climate  change,  and  are  the  ones  who  live  and  understand  its  social  dimensions,  and  whereas  they  are  the  actors  that  have  the  moral  strength  and  the  creative  capacity  necessary  to  change  course  towards  systems  that  are  fair  and  sustainable  enabling  a  lasting  happiness  in  harmony  with  the  cycles  of  nature;  Whereas,  the  developing  countries  are  faced  with  various  kinds  of  problems  and  endure  more  and  major  consequences  of  climate  change  than  the  developed  countries;  Hereby  declare:  As  to  the  INTERGENERATIONAL  EQUALITY  AND  RIGHTS  OF  THE  FUTURE  GENERATIONS  “Let  us  go  to  the  future,  let  us  bring  it  and  sow  it  here”  Hugo  Chávez  1.  “Men  and  women  have  become  consumerist  monsters  that  consume  all  the  resources  given  by  the  Earth”.  Génesis  Carmona,  aged  11,  elected  representative  of  the  Venezuelan  Children  Environment  Movements.  2.  We  must  share  our  experiences  from  all  over  the  world  to  understand  and  construct  true  solutions.  Expressing  solidarity  to  88  comrades  in  other  parts  of  the  world  means  understanding  their  context,  understanding  their  struggle  for  life,  sovereignty  and  identity.  3.  Change  depends  on  the  capacity  of  our  generation  to  produce  a  counterculture,  transform  the  consumption  model  into  Good  Living  and  global  cooperative  societies.  We  must  generate  a  revolutionary  counterculture.  The  task  of  youth  is  to  open  roads  and  generate  cracks  in  a  system  that  is  unsustainable.  4.  Youth  must  be  politicized  and  empowered.  Most  importantly,  youth  must  have  the  will  and  the  capacity  to  transform  things.  We  must  change  the  system  and  begin  to  mobilize  our  best  efforts.  It  is  not  an  environmental  issue  alone;  it  is  an  issue  that  is  deeply  social,  ethical,  political  and  cultural.  5.  We  must  change  our  perception  of  power  and  promote  diverse  and  inclusive  spaces,  open  to  intercultural  thinking.  We  must  move  from  the  discourse  to  a  transforming  action.  6.  The  world  needs  corrective  actions  before  damages  become  irreversible.  We  denounce  the  lack  of  political  will  of  the  wealthiest  countries.  7.  Education  must  look  like  the  society  we  dream  of.  It  must  be  revolutionary  and  transform  reality.  If  it  cannot  undertake  such  transformations,  it  does  not  work.  Education  and  communication  are  the  cornerstones  for  transformation.  8.  The  environmental  issue  must  be  a  pillar  in  curricula.  It  is  necessary  to  re-­‐think  the  way  how  people  are  educated  on  environment  and  Climate  Change.  We  need  to  open  new  spaces  where  the  ultimate  causes  of  the  environmental  crisis  are  discussed.  Youth  need  to  promote  such  changes.  The  hegemonic  system  is  frightened  of  peoples  that  are  educated  because  they  may  call  into  question  the  structures  power.  9.  Colonialism  continues  to  operate.  Climate  change  occurs  within  a  historic  context  where  a  group  of  countries  based  their  development  on  practices  generating  the  current  environmental  crisis,  including  Climate  Change,  while  others  suffer  the  worst  consequences.  The  developed  countries  causing  the  Climate  Change  intend  to  side-­‐  track  the  discussion  towards  technological  or  market  solutions,  thus  eluding  their  historic  responsibilities.  10.  The  struggles  of  the  South  must  be  supported  in  the  countries  of  the  North.  The  wealthiest  countries  must  commit  themselves  to  finding  a  solution  to  the  Climate  Change.  Youth  in  the  North  must  exert  pressure  on  their  governments  in  that  sense.  There  is  not  much  time  left,  the  global  North  must  take  on  its  historic  responsibility  and  youth  must  exert  pressure  for  this  to  happen.  11.  We  need  to  recover  the  notion  of  solidarity,  understand  the  differences  existing  among  the  countries,  their  different  historic  contexts,  the  right  to  Good  Living  and  also  the  responsibilities  of  development.  Transition  may  not  be  restricted  to  a  reduction  of  emissions.  It  has  to  be  a  fair  transition  guaranteeing  that  the  peoples  of  the  South  will  not  be  adversely  affected.  12.  We  need  to  create  our  own  dreams,  forget  the  perverse  developmentalist  dream,  and  find  inspiration  in  ourselves.  We  need  to  share  a  new  narrative  based  on  our  own  experiences.  As  to  89  BUEN  VIVIR  (GOOD  AND  SUSTAINABLE  LIVING)  Climate  Ethics:  Differentiated  Responsibilities  and  Respective  Capacities  13.  It  is  necessary  to  reach  an  alternative  development  model  based  on  the  principles  of  living  in  harmony  with  nature,  guided  by  absolute  and  ecological  sustainability  limits,  and  the  capacity  of  mother  Earth  as  well;  a  fair,  egalitarian  model  that  constructs  sustainable  economies  that  moves  us  away  from  energy  models  based  on  fossil  fuels  and  hazardous  energies,  that  guarantees  and  recognizes  the  respect  to  Mother  Earth,  the  rights  of  women,  children,  adolescents,  gender  diversity,  the  impoverished,  the  vulnerable  minority  groups  and  the  original  indigenous  peoples  –  A  fair  and  egalitarian  model  that  fosters  the  peaceful  coexistence  of  our  peoples.  We  likewise  want  a  society  where  the  right  of  Mother  Earth  prevails  over  neoliberal  policies,  economic  globalization  and  patriarchy,  because  without  Mother  Earth  life  does  not  exist.  14.  The  main  sources  for  climate  crisis  are  the  political  and  economic  systems  commercializing  and  reifying  nature  and  life,  thus  impoverishing  spirituality  and  imposing  consumerism  and  developmentalism  that  generate  unequal  regimes  and  exploitation  of  resources.  This  global  crisis  is  exacerbated  by  unsustainable  practices  of  exploitation  and  consumption  by  the  developed  countries  and  the  elites  of  the  developing  countries.  We  demand  the  leaders  in  the  North  not  to  continue  such  wicked  practices  that  destroy  the  planet  and  demand  the  leaders  in  the  South  not  to  follow  the  development  models  in  place  in  the  North  which  lead  to  this  civilizing  crisis.  We  urge  them  to  construct  an  alternative  path  to  achieve  fair,  egalitarian  and  sustainable  societies  and  fair  economies.  For  such  purposes,  it  is  required  that  the  developed  countries  meet  their  moral  and  legal  obligations,  especially  vis-­‐à-­‐vis  vulnerable  and  marginalized  countries  and  communities  by  lifting  barriers  such  as  intellectual  property  rights  which  prevent  the  attainment  of  the  preservation  of  life  over  the  planet  and  the  salvation  of  human  species.  We  likewise  urge  them  to  comply  with  the  financial  contribution  and  the  transfer  of  safe  and  locally  suitable  technologies  free  from  barriers  such  as  intellectual  property  rights,  strengthen  capacities  and  embrace  the  principles  set  forth  in  the  Climate  Change  Convention  and  in  the  Rio  Earth  Summit,  especially  as  to  the  common  but  differentiated  responsibilities  and  respective  capabilities,  and  the  principles  of  precaution  and  gender  equality.  15.  According  to  scientific  evidence,  in  order  not  to  exceed  1.5  degrees  increase  of  temperature,  it  becomes  necessary  not  to  produce  80%  of  the  fossil  fuel  reserves  known.  For  this  purpose,  the  developed  countries  require  to  immediately  reduce  consumption  and  production  of  fossil  fuels.  Also,  they  need  to  recognize  the  rights  of  the  developing  countries  that  rely  on  the  production  of  fossil  fuels  as  a  source  of  revenues.  The  developing  countries  require  time  for  a  fair  transition  to  reduce  their  dependence  on  such  activity,  as  the  developed  countries  should  provide  unconditional  assistance  to  the  developing  nations  so  that  the  latter  may  carry  out  such  urgent  transition.  16.  We  demand  the  change  of  the  production  and  consumption  patterns  taking  into  account  the  historic  responsibilities  of  the  90  emissions  from  nations  and  corporations  and  their  cumulative  nature,  thus  recognizing  that  the  carbon  atmospheric  space  is  finite  and  needs  to  be  equally  distributed  amongst  the  countries  and  their  peoples.  17.  The  historically  unequal  overconsumption  of  the  global  emissions  budget  managed  by  mainstream  corporations  and  economic  systems  has  contributed  to  cause  inequalities  in  terms  of  the  capacities  of  the  countries.  Some  key  indicators  to  measure  such  disparity  would  be  the  national  per  capita  emission  of  greenhouse  effect  gases  since  1850,  the  distribution  and  size  of  the  wealth  and  national  income,  and  the  technological  resources  owned  by  a  country.  Such  indicators  may  be  used  to  determine  the  fair  portion  of  effort  corresponding  to  each  country  (emissions  budget)  if  the  Earth  limits  are  respected  and  if  the  historic  responsibilities,  the  needs  for  sustainable  development,  the  losses  and  damages  caused  by  climate  change  and  the  need  of  technology  transfer  and  financial  support  are  recognized.  18.  We  demand  the  implementation  of  a  Justice,  Ethics  and  Moral  Court  on  Climate  Change,  where  humanity  at  large  may  file  complaints  against  crimes  related  to  this  topic.  19.  We  reject  any  attempt  to  implement  or  promote  dangerous  and  unethical  solutions  or  responses  to  Climate  Change,  solutions  whereby  wealthy  industrialized  countries  and  corporations  ultimately  seek  to  use  climate  change  as  a  means  for  profit.  Some  of  such  false  responses,  such  as  carbon  production  and  soils,  whereas  the  implementation  of  the  “United  Nations  Program  on  Reducing  Emissions  from  Deforestation  and  Forest  Degradation  in  Developing  Countries  (UN-­‐  REDD)”  and  the  production  of  agrofuels,  have  already  caused  seizure  and  fragmentation  of  lands.  As  to  the  Social  Impact  of  Climate  Change  20.  The  environment  is  a  political  issue,  which  has  to  do  with  power,  and  therefore  it  is  necessary  that  the  peoples  and  the  social  movements  are  empowered  and  participate  on  the  making  of  the  decisions  that  affect  them.  21.  Risk  management  must  have  deep  social  and  local  roots,  and  include  national,  local  and  community-­‐based  risk  alert,  prevention  and  management  systems  as  an  essential  part  of  the  adaptation  process.  22.  Planning  must  be  participative  and  lean  towards  a  habitat  (either  urban  or  rural)  constructed  and  managed  by  everybody  to  meet  the  needs  of  the  inhabitants  in  their  specific  contexts  of  action.  23.  It  is  necessary  to  generate  structural  changes  in  the  mainstream  production,  distribution  and  consumption  models  that  reject  the  commodification  of  nature  as  a  solution  to  climate  change.  24.  We  demand  the  repair  of  historic  debts,  and  reject  the  financing  proposals  which  do  not  bring  about  effective  transformations  for  a  sustainable  solution.  25.  Buen  Vivir  (Good  Living)  practices  should  be  promoted:  To  feel  good,  live  fully  and  stay  in  balance  and  harmony  with  the  others,  and  respect  the  cycles  of  life  and  the  Mother  Earth.  91  26.  We  must  promote  territory  participative  management  by  fostering  social  dialogue  and  ensuring  the  participation  of  women  in  the  decision-­‐making  and  in  the  implementation  of  mitigation  and  adaptation  mechanisms  vis-­‐  à-­‐vis  climate  change.  27.  It  is  necessary  to  recover  the  ancestral  technologies  and  promote  the  training  and  support  of  popular  technology  experts  with  the  capacity  to  create  new  technologies  which  contribute  to  mitigation  and  adaptation  to  climate  change.  28.  Communities  must  have  access  to  information  on  the  Climate  Change  negotiations  through  strategies  devised  for  such  purposes.  29.  We  must  include  Climate  Change  as  a  topic  in  the  curriculum  at  all  levels  and  in  the  programs  of  all  disciplines,  focusing  on  the  structural  causes  for  climate  change.  30.  It  is  necessary  to  design  strategies  to  guarantee  social  security  of  workers  and  the  dialogue  between  them  and  the  governments  in  the  transition  to  a  new  economic  model  that  respond  to  Climate  Change  problems.  31.  Forms  of  penalization,  penalties  and  repair  mechanisms  are  necessary  for  crimes  against  nature.  Violation  of  Human  Rights  need  to  be  seen  not  only  as  a  weapons  use  problem,  but  also  as  a  result  of  other  forms  of  aggression,  such  as  the  pollution  of  the  Earth  by  the  use  of  agrotoxics  and  the  restriction  of  access  to  water.  32.  Promote  small-­‐scale  family  farming  without  agrotoxics  as  an  alternative  economic  model  that  guarantees  good  and  healthy  nourishment  for  the  peoples.  As  to  Social  Participation  in  the  Decision-­‐making  33.  We  must  organize  ourselves  to  guarantee  life  on  the  planet  through  a  great  world  social  movement.  A  change  of  attitude  for  a  conscience  of  power  keeping  the  peoples  united  becomes  necessary.  As  organized  peoples  we  can  push  for  the  transformation  of  the  system.  34.  We  must  guarantee  compliance  with  the  Convention,  especially  in  the  matter  concerning  the  participation  of  the  Social  Movements  and  Organizations.  35.  The  current  spaces  need  to  be  broadened,  and  new  broad  and  permanent  spaces  for  participation  need  to  be  created  so  that  Social  Movements  and  Organizations  may  contribute  their  proposals  to  guide  the  decisions  in  the  negotiation  process  of  the  Convention.  36.  It  is  necessary  to  establish  nationwide  information  and  full  citizen  participation  mechanisms  to  be  aware  and  include  the  vision  of  the  peoples  with  regard  to  climate  problems  and  promote  transparency  in  the  dissemination  of  information  on  the  status  of  the  negotiation  of  the  Convention.  37.  The  accreditation  and  financing  mechanisms  for  participation  shall  be  revised  and  improved  so  that  they  do  not  constitute  an  obstacle  that  hinders  effective  participation  of  the  Social  Movements  and  Organization  in  the  negotiation  process  of  the  Convention.  38.  Transparency  and  access  to  relevant  and  adequate  information  in  the  processes  associated  with  the  participation  of  Social  92  Movements  and  Organizations  in  the  Convention  are  to  be  guaranteed.  39.  It  is  important  to  take  into  account  diversity  in  the  forms  of  social  organization  as  basis  to  broaden  their  participation  on  the  Convention.  40.  We  must  propose  the  creation  of  a  high-­‐  level  committee  to  restructure  the  participation  mechanisms  in  the  Convention.  It  should  include  social  movements  and  Non-­‐  Governmental  Organizations  and  count  on  the  participation  of  countries  with  significant  experience  on  this  issue.  41.  We  reject  the  interference  of  the  corporations  in  the  decisions  of  the  United  Nations  Organizations  to  the  prejudice  of  the  rights  of  the  Peoples  and  the  sovereignty  of  the  States.  42.  Citizen  consultation  processes  need  to  be  established  to  guide  the  decision-­‐making  of  each  government  within  the  Convention,  such  as  national  consultation  referenda  with  a  direct  impact  on  the  climate  agreement.  43.  We  demand  the  UN  the  public  dissemination  and  access  to  the  sessions,  meetings  and  negotiations  with  translation  in  the  languages  of  the  peoples.  44.  Material  conditions  need  to  be  guaranteed,  such  as  time,  space  and  the  necessary  resources  for  the  mobilization  and  participation  of  social  movements  and  organizations  in  the  processes  associated  with  the  negotiations  on  climate  change  and  binding  topics  within  the  UN.  45.  It  is  necessary  that  the  ancestral  knowledge  of  the  Peoples  be  deemed  as  equally  important  and  valuable  as  scientific  knowledge  for  decision-­‐making  and  for  actions  against  climate  change  by  the  UN  and  by  the  governments.  46.  We  demand  that  the  use  of  specialized  language  and  the  profusion  of  acronyms  in  the  UN  do  not  constitute  exclusion  mechanisms  preventing  the  understanding  of  the  climate  negotiation  process  by  the  peoples  of  the  world.  47.  Synergies  should  be  created  between  the  governments  and  the  Social  Movements  and  Non-­‐Governmental  Organizations  to  promote  the  attendance  of  the  latter  to  the  work  sessions  and  their  coordinated  participation  on  the  decision  making  of  the  negotiation  process.  As  to  Fighting  Climate  Change:  Direct  Action  for  Transformation  46.  The  structural  causes  for  climate  change  are  linked  to  the  current  capitalist  hegemonic  system.  Fighting  the  climate  change  involves  changing  the  system.  47.  The  change  of  the  system  must  provide  for  a  transformation  of  the  economic,  political,  social  and  cultural  systems  at  local,  national,  regional  and  global  levels.  48.  Education  is  a  right  of  the  peoples,  a  continuous  process  of  fair,  free,  and  transversal  comprehensive  training.  Education  is  one  of  the  fundamental  driving  forces  for  transformation  and  construction  in  diversity  of  the  new  women  and  men,  for  the  Good  Living  and  the  respect  of  life  and  Mother  Earth.  49.  Education  should  be  oriented  to  reflect  value,  create,  raise  awareness,  coexist,  93  participate  and  act.  When  we  speak  of  education  to  face  the  climate  change,  we  speak  of  the  main  roots  of  such  change  and  the  historic  and  current  responsibilities.  We  also  speak  of  poverty,  inequality  and  vulnerability  of  the  peoples,  especially  the  indigenous  peoples  and  other  historically  excluded  and  victimized  groups.  50.  Social  participation  is  a  fundamental  driving  force  for  transformation.  It  is  necessary  to  facilitate  the  integration  of  social  movements  and  include  the  peoples  and  their  organizations  in  the  decision-­‐  making  process  at  all  levels.  51.  Any  transformation  mechanism  must  include  the  principles  of  respect  to  life  and  human  rights;  sovereignty  of  the  peoples,  solidarity,  fair  transition  and  the  recognition  of  the  ecological  limits  and  the  rights  of  Mother  Earth.  It  should  also  consider  the  common  but  differentiated  responsibilities;  the  ancestral  character  of  the  indigenous  peoples,  the  various  forms  and  degrees  of  vulnerability  of  the  countries  and  the  peoples,  especially  the  indigenous  peoples  and  other  historically  excluded  and  victimized  human  groups.  52.  We  reject  the  implementation  of  false  solutions  to  climate  change,  such  as:  carbon  markets  and  other  forms  of  privatization  and  commodification  of  life;  geo-­‐engineering,  agrofuels  productions,  and  measures  favoring  agribusiness  and  harming  the  production  of  food  in  an  agro  ecological  manner,  such  as  the  use  of  transgenic  seeds  and  agrotoxics,  synthetic  fertilizers  and  any  other  measure  lessening  the  priority  of  the  right  to  Good  Living,  health  and  the  eradication  of  poverty  enshrined  in  the  Convention.  We  likewise  reject  the  green  economy,  the  intellectual  property  rights;  the  mega  water  dam  projects,  monocultures  and  nuclear  energy.  53.  It  is  necessary  to  know  and  take  into  account  the  extraterritorial  effects  of  climate  solutions.  54.  We  propose  the  following  actions  to  change  the  system:  o  Transformation  of  the  power  relations  and  the  decisionmaking  systems  for  the  construction  of  an  anti-­‐patriarchal  people’s  power.  o  Transformation  of  food  production  systems  into  agro  ecological  systems,  thus  ensuring  food  sovereignty  and  security  and  valuing  knowledge,  innovations,  ancestral  and  traditional  practices.  o  Transformation  of  the  energy  production  systems,  eradicating  dirty  energies  respecting  the  right  of  the  peoples  to  fight  poverty  and  keeping  fair  transition  as  a  guiding  principle.  o  Transformation  of  the  energy  consumption  patterns  through  education,  regulations  to  large  energy  consumers  and  empowerment  of  the  people  over  community-­‐scaled  systems  of  renewable  energies  production  under  control  of  the  communities.  Implement  participative  government  of  territory  and  city  planning  systems,  thus  ensuring  fair  and  sustainable  access  to  land  and  to  urban  services,  as  well  as  other  means  that  are  necessary  to  face  the  Climate  Change  impacts.  o  Shift  from  an  energy  and  materials  profligate  system  to  a  cyclic  system  that  emphasizes  the  eradication  of  the  unsustainable  exploitation  of  nature  and  94  promotes  reduction,  reutilization  and  recycling  of  residues.  o  Ensure  the  financing  by  the  developed  countries  to  developing  countries  for  such  transformations,  and  for  compensation  and  rehabilitation  of  the  impacts  of  Climate  Change.  Financing  must  not  be  conditioned,  and  the  management  of  the  funds  supplied  shall  be  in  the  hands  of  the  Peoples.  o  Create  accessible  mechanisms  for  the  protection  of  the  displaced  people  and  the  defenders  of  the  environmental  rights.  As  to  the  North-­‐South  Responsibilities:  Commitments  of  the  North  to  Promote  Actions  in  the  South  55.  The  financing  of  mitigation  and  adaptation  actions  by  the  developed  countries  in  the  developing  countries  is  a  moral  and  legal  obligation  under  the  Convention  by  virtue  of  the  historic  responsibilities  of  the  former.  Funding  must  be  reliable,  predictable,  sufficient  and  adequate.  56.  All  obligations  of  the  countries  in  the  North  in  relation  to  finance,  technology  transfer  and  support  for  the  compensation  of  losses  and  damages  should  be  legally  binding  under  the  Climate  Change  Convention.  57.  Financing  mechanisms  must  not  respond  to  the  logics  of  market  supply  and  demand,  but  to  compliance  with  responsibilities.  It  must  be  guaranteed  that  funds  promote  development  and  reach  the  most  vulnerable  communities.  58.  Technology  transfer  from  countries  in  the  North  to  the  South  must  promote  the  process  of  appropriation,  innovation  and  endogenous  technology  development.  In  this  connection,  it  is  essential  to  consider  specific  mechanisms  to  lift  the  barriers  created  by  intellectual  property  rights.  South-­‐South  technology  transfer  and  cooperation  need  also  to  be  promoted,  and  the  value  of  the  knowledge  of  the  ancestral  people  and  of  the  senior  citizens  as  well.  59.  Adaptation  transcends  the  construction  of  infrastructure.  Injustice,  marginalization  and  social  exclusion  adversely  impact  on  the  vulnerability  and  the  possibility  to  adapt.  These  aspects  need  to  be  considered  in  the  Climate  Change  adaptation  programs  and  in  the  financial  mechanisms.  60.  Loss  and  damages  caused  by  Climate  Change  must  be  considered  from  the  perspective  of  justice  and  human  rights.  The  governments  of  the  South  must  receive  from  the  North  the  necessary  funds  to  compensate  loss  and  damages.  South-­‐South  solidarity  systems  need  to  be  endorsed.  The  experience  of  Venezuela’s  assistance  to  Caribbean  countries  and  their  massive  housing  programs  constitute  an  example  of  solidarity  vis-­‐à-­‐vis  the  loss  and  damages  generated  by  climate  change.  61.  The  military  sector  is  one  of  the  main  consumers  of  fossil  fuels  and  one  of  the  largest  gas-­‐emission  contributors  in  the  planet.  This  needs  to  be  included  in  the  global  discussions  on  Climate  Change.  The  military  sector  shall  be  responsible  and  accountable.  62.  Our  task  as  civil  society  is  to  work  for  the  transformation  of  our  societies  and  the  production  and  consumption  systems  which  constitute  the  cause  for  climate  change  by  generating  new  development  paradigms  determined  by  the  peoples.  Part  of  this  task  95  needs  to  aim  at  influencing  the  national  governments  and  international  settings  such  as  the  United  Nations  Framework  Convention  on  Climate  Change.  96  A  Zero  Emissions  Manifesto  for  the  Climate  Justice  Movement  Tom  Weis,  President,  Climate  Crisis  Solutions  Rev.  Lennox  Yearwood,  President  and  CEO,  Hip  Hop  Caucus  Posted:  /2014  11:54  am  EDT  Updated:  /2014  7:59  pm  EDT    emissions-­‐manifesto-­‐climate-­‐change/  “Zero  emissions  is  an  ambitious  but  achievable  goal.“  –UN  Secretary-­‐General  Ban  Ki-­‐moon  Zero  has  become  the  most  important  number  for  humanity.  Why?  Any  chance  of  stabilizing  the  climate  hinges  on  transitioning  to  zero  greenhouse  gas  emissions  as  quickly  as  humanly  possible.  Simply  slowing  the  rise  of  emissions  will  not  work.  For  the  first  time,  the  world’s  leading  climate  authority,  the  Intergovernmental  Panel  on  Climate  Change  (IPCC),  has  embraced  a  goal  of  near  zero  greenhouse  gas  emissions  or  below.  Top  military  experts  and  government  institutions  like  the  U.S.  Department  of  Defense  and  National  Intelligence  Council  warn  that  climate  destabilization  threatens  our  national  security,  yet  global  emissions  just  keep  going  up.  Leading  biologists  like  E.O.  Wilson  warn  that  the  sixth  great  extinction  is  now  upon  us,  yet  emissions  keep  going  up.  By  heating  the  globe  at  such  a  relentless  rate,  we  are  playing  a  deadly  game  of  planetary  Russian  roulette.  In  the  words  of  Michael  Mann,  professor  of  meteorology  at  Penn  State  University:  “There  is  no  precedent  for  what  we  are  doing  to  the  atmosphere.  It  is  an  uncontrolled  experiment.”  If  you  believe  your  own  eyes  that  climate  chaos  has  already  gone  too  far,  the  only  logical  response  is  to  stop  making  things  worse.  We  are  not  suggesting  ending  the  use  of  fossil  fuels  tomorrow.  Decarbonizing  our  industries,  homes,  transportation,  power  generation  and  food  production  will  take  years  of  concerted  effort  and  require  every  ounce  of  courage,  ingenuity,  patience  and  humility  we  possess.  But  intergenerational  justice  demands  that  we  commit  ourselves  now  as  a  nation  to  leading  this  green  industrial  revolution.  Some  will  no  doubt  call  this  goal  unrealistic,  saying  it  cannot  be  achieved,  but  they  would  underestimate  the  creative  genius  of  the  American  people.  What  is  unrealistic  is  thinking  we  can  continue  with  business  as  usual  and  leave  a  habitable  planet  for  our  children.  Americans  are  a  supremely  resourceful  people  with  a  long  history  of  meeting,  and  exceeding,  monumental  challenges.  While  we  have  never  faced  anything  as  daunting  as  the  global  climate  crisis,  there  are  precedents  for  the  U.S.  overcoming  seemingly  insurmountable  odds.  When  destiny  came  knocking  during  World  War  II,  we  initially  resisted,  then  answered  by  leading  the  allied  forces  to  victory  in  three  and  a  half  short  years.  It  took  a  Civil  War  to  end  the  scourge  of  slavery,  and  a  monumental  civil  rights  struggle  to  outlaw  segregation,  Jim  Crow  laws  and  discrimination,  but  we  not  only  overcame,  we  elected  a  person  of  color  as  President  of  the  United  States.  97  When  President  John  Kennedy  boldly  challenged  America  to  land  a  man  on  the  moon  in  less  than  a  decade,  our  best  and  brightest  responded  by  accomplishing  this  seemingly  impossible  task  ahead  of  schedule.  It  is  now  time  for  our  generation  to  do  something  great.  Zero  Emissions  Bandwagon  It  may  surprise  you  to  learn  that  zero  emissions  has  already  been  embraced  as  a  goal  by  business  leaders  as  well-­‐known  as  Bill  Gates,  and  world  leaders  as  prominent  as  UN  Secretary-­‐General  Ban  Ki-­‐moon;  OECD  Secretary-­‐General  Angel  Gurria;  UN  climate  chief  Christiana  Figueres;  Prince  Charles;  and  former  President  Jimmy  Carter,  former  UN  Secretary-­‐General  Kofi  Annan,  and  Archbishop  Desmond  Tutu  of  The  Elders.  Again,  even  the  conservative,  consensus-­‐  based  IPCC  supports  near  zero  emissions  or  below,  albeit  on  a  year  2100  timeline  that  belies  the  urgency  of  their  August  draft  report,  which  warns  of  “irreversible  impacts”  from  continued  emissions.  Major  corporations,  like  Google,  have  embraced  a  zero  carbon  goal.  Others  like  Microsoft  and  Deutsche  Bank  are  moving  in  this  direction  by  committing  to  net  zero  emissions,  or  carbon  neutrality  (using  carbon  offsets  or  carbon  credits  to  balance  out  remaining  emissions).  684  college  and  university  presidents  (and  growing)  have  taken  a  similar  climate  neutrality  pledge.  And  a  fossil  fuel  divestment  movement  is  picking  up  steam  on  college  campuses  (including  Stanford  University,  Sydney  University  and  historically  black  colleges  and  universities)  and  in  houses  of  worship  around  the  world.  Sweden,  Iceland,  Costa  Rica  and  the  Maldives  are  among  the  nations  vying  for  carbon  neutrality.  Denmark  is  committed  to  becoming  fossil  fuel  free,  with  Copenhagen  seeking  to  become  the  world’s  first  carbon-­‐  neutral  capital  by  2025.  In  the  U.S.,  cities  like  Austin  and  Boulder  are  striving  for  carbon  neutrality,  with  San  Francisco  pledging  to  generate  all  of  its  electricity  from  renewables  by  2020.  Scotland  is  on  track  to  generate  100  percent  of  its  electricity  from  renewables  by  2020.  The  Philippines  aims  to  shift  the  country’s  fuel  system  to  100  percent  renewables  in  ten  years.  The  German  state  of  Schleswig-­‐  Holstein  is  set  to  go  100  percent  renewable  this  year.  Munich’s  goal  is  100  percent  renewables  by  2025.  The  British  Labour  Party  wants  to  decarbonize  the  UK’s  electricity  grid  by  2030.  And  the  island  nation  of  Tokelau  is  already  100  percent  renewable.  In  stark  contrast,  neither  the  U.S.  President,  nor  a  single  member  of  the  U.S.  Congress,  has  yet  publicly  called  for  a  zero  emissions  goal  for  America.  2̊°C  Wrong  Target  Just  because  the  governments  of  the  world  accept  2°  Celsius  of  heating  above  the  preindustrial  average  as  the  agreed-­‐upon  target  does  not  make  it  the  right  target.  To  the  contrary,  last  December,  preeminent  climate  scientist  James  Hansen  and  seventeen  co-­‐authors  released  a  study  in  the  scientific  journal  PLOS  ONE  revealing  the  UN-­‐  approved  2°C  ceiling  is  based  on  politics,  not  science,  and  would  unleash  “disastrous  consequences”  beyond  our  control.  Dr.  Hansen,  economist  Jeffrey  Sachs,  and  others  argue  that  “morality”  demands  a  rapid  98  and  dramatic  cut  in  global  carbon  emissions  to  stay  as  close  as  possible  to  a  1°C  ceiling  (we  are  already  at  0.85°C).  Here’s  what  they  said  about  the  urgency  of  dropping  from  the  current  level  of  400  parts  per  million  (a  level  not  reached  in  at  least  800,000  years)  of  carbon  dioxide  (CO2)  in  the  atmosphere  to  350  parts  per  million  (ppm),  the  level  many  consider  the  uppermost  safe  limit  for  civilization:  “It  is  instructive  to  see  how  fast  atmospheric  CO2  declines  if  fossil  fuel  emissions  are  instantly  terminated.  Halting  emissions  in  2015  causes  CO2  to  decline  to  350  ppm  at  century’s  end.  A  20  year  delay  in  halting  emissions  has  CO2  returning  to  350  ppm  at  about  2300.  With  a  40  year  delay,  CO2  does  not  return  to  350  ppm  until  after  3000.  These  results  show  how  difficult  it  is  to  get  back  to  350  ppm  if  emissions  continue  to  grow  for  even  a  few  decades.”  We’re  obviously  not  going  to  achieve  zero  emissions  by  2015.  The  point  is  we  need  to  do  it  as  soon  as  necessary  to  avoid  catastrophe  impacts  from  global  climate  change.  Every  day  we  delay  buries  us  deeper  in  the  climate  hole.  Failure  of  Moral  Leadership  The  United  Nations,  Congress  and  the  White  House  are  all  failing  in  their  moral  obligation  to  stem  the  tide  of  this  gathering  storm.  The  United  Nations  is  not  leading  on  this  issue,  as  it  must.  Since  1990,  when  the  IPCC  issued  its  first  report,  CO2  emissions  have  increased  by  approximately  sixty  percent.  Last  year  in  Warsaw,  after  19  successive  sessions  of  the  UN  Conference  of  the  Parties  (COP)  failed  to  achieve  meaningful  emissions  reductions,  labor  and  environmental  groups  walked  out  after  deciding  governments  were  performing  so  poorly  they  could  no  longer  legitimize  the  climate  cop-­‐out  with  their  presence.  Congress  is  not  leading  on  this  issue,  as  it  must.  Since  refusing  to  ratify  the  1997  Kyoto  protocol,  the  U.S.  Congress  has  failed  to  enact  any  significant  climate  legislation.  The  closest  they  came  was  a  Wall  Street-­‐friendly  “cap  and  trade”  bill  passed  by  the  Democratic-­‐  controlled  House  of  Representatives  in  2009.  Described  as  an  “unacceptable  compromise”  by  Greenpeace  and  “a  step  backwards”  by  Friends  of  the  Earth,  it  called  for  a  modest  17  percent  reduction  of  carbon  emissions  by  2020.  Five  years  later,  too  few  members  of  the  Republican-­‐controlled  House  of  Representatives  are  even  willing  to  admit  humans  are  changing  the  climate.  The  White  House  is  not  leading  on  this  issue,  as  it  must.  The  EPA’s  proposed  rules  to  limit  carbon  pollution  from  existing  coal-­‐fired  power  plants  are  a  step  in  the  right  direction,  but  President  Obama’s  widely  heralded  “climate  action  plan”  will  be  more  PR  than  plan,  with  no  chance  of  stabilizing  the  climate,  unless  the  White  House  takes  bold  action.  In  fact,  the  administration’s  attempt  to  please  all  during  this  climate  crisis  with  its  all-­‐of-­‐the-­‐above  energy  strategy  promises  more  climate  chaos  by  promoting  natural  gas  fracking;  mountaintop  removal  mining;  deepwater  and  Arctic  oil  drilling;  tar  sands  mining;  and  deafening  seismic  oil  and  gas  exploration  off  the  Atlantic  coast.  That  the  President  has  not  yet  denounced  a  scheme  as  “absurdly  reckless”  as  Keystone  XL‘s  northern  leg  speaks  volumes.  Even  the  renewable  energy  industry  is  not  leading  on  this  issue,  as  it  must.  Four  years  after  it  was  first  pointed  out,  America’s  99  largest  wind,  solar  and  geothermal  trade  associations  continue  to  embrace  incrementalism,  when  the  times  call  for  revolutionary  change.  Because  the  climate  crisis  threatens  all  life  on  Earth,  it  is  first  and  foremost  a  moral  issue.  We  have  already  seen  how  the  poor  and  communities  of  color  bear  the  brutal  brunt  of  fossil  fuel  extraction  and  suffer  the  most  from  extreme  weather  disasters.  Three  out  of  four  African  Americans  live  within  30  miles  of  a  coal-­‐fired  power  plant.  African-­‐American  children  have  an  80  percent  higher  rate  of  asthma,  and  are  nearly  three  times  more  likely  to  die  from  asthma,  than  their  white  peers.  The  moral  urgency  of  this  crisis  requires  a  rainbow  coalition  of  people  -­‐  reflecting  the  diversity  of  our  great  nation  -­‐  coming  together  to  solve  it.  Alarmingly,  latest  projections  by  the  U.S.  Energy  Information  Administration  have  fossil  fuels  supplying  almost  80  percent  of  the  world’s  energy  use  through  2040,  with  carbon  dioxide  emissions  rising  46  percent  from  2010  levels.  If  this  perilous  trend  is  not  reversed,  runaway  climate  change  could  cause  most  of  life  on  Earth  to  go  extinct,  testing  the  survival  of  humanity  itself.  As  the  nation  that  historically  contributed  the  most  to  global  climate  pollution,  and  is  in  the  strongest  position  to  respond,  the  U.S.  has  a  moral  imperative  to  lead  this  global  charge.  Making  the  Great  Transition  It  is  time  for  America  to  unleash  its  entrepreneurial  can-­‐do  spirit  through  a  wartime-­‐like  mobilization  to  help  save  America,  and  the  world.  Innovating  to  zero  emissions  will  not  only  help  ensure  our  collective  survival,  it  is  the  key  to  revitalizing  our  ailing  economy  and  putting  America  back  to  work.  But  we  don’t  have  until  2100,  or  even  2050,  to  transition  off  of  fossil  fuels.  Scientists  are  calling  for  deep  cuts  in  emissions  now.  Leaders  showing  us  how  to  get  there  include:  • The  National  Renewable  Energy  Laboratory,  which  in  2012  commissioned  a  Renewable  Electricity  Futures  Study  showing  that  80%  of  all  U.S.  electricity  demand  can  be  met  with  currently  commercially  available  renewable  energy  technologies  at  the  hourly  level  every  day  of  the  year.  • Former  Vice  President  Al  Gore,  who  in  2008  boldly  called  for  100%  renewable  electricity  for  the  U.S.  by  2018.  • Lester  Brown,  who  in  2008  mapped  out  how  to  achieve  80%  carbon  cuts  worldwide  by  2020  in  his  authoritative  book  Plan  B.  • Marc  Jacobson  and  Mark  Delucchi,  who  in  2009  released  a  plan  to  power  the  planet  with  100  percent  renewables  by  2030,  a  vision  that  spawned  The  Solutions  Project  (a  plan  to  transition  all  50  states  to  100  percent  renewables).  • The  prestigious  Tyndall  Centre  for  Climate  Change  Research  in  London,  Zero  Carbon  Britain  and  Australia’s  Beyond  Zero  Emissions,  all  of  which  are  working  to  achieve  zero  emissions.  Zero  Emissions  Mandate  We  have  solutions.  They  even  have  names:  conservation;  energy  efficiency;  solar  power;  wind  power;  geothermal  power;  standing  forests;  organic  farms;  industrial  hemp;  100  electric  vehicles;  bicycles;  mass  transit;  wave  energy;  tidal  power;  zero  waste  ...  Here  and  there  aggressive  initiatives  are  underway.  China  is  developing  a  single  38,000  MW  wind  project  large  enough  to  electrify  a  country  the  size  of  Poland.  Four  states  in  Germany  already  get  more  than  50  percent  of  their  electricity  from  wind  power,  while  in  the  U.S.,  Iowa  and  South  Dakota  are  generating  more  than  25  percent  of  their  electricity  from  wind  farms.  But  progress  is  not  being  made  at  anything  close  to  a  speed  and  scale  commensurate  with  the  scope  of  the  planetary  emergency  we  face.  On,  Sept.  23,  a  UN  Climate  Summit  is  being  held  in  New  York  City.  UN  Secretary-­‐General  Ban  Ki-­‐moon  has  challenged  world  leaders  to  bring  their  pledges  to  set  the  world  on  a  low-­‐  carbon  path.  We  entreat  Mr.  Ban,  who  calls  zero  emissions  an  “achievable  goal,”  to  challenge  attendees  of  the  UN  Climate  Summit  to  bring  their  zero  emissions  plans  to  COP20  in  Peru  this  December  and  to  COP21  in  France  in  2015.  Anything  less  will  show  our  governments  are  not  serious  about  solving  this  existential  threat.  Our  colleague  Bill  McKibben,  who  earlier  this  year  called  out  the  Obama  administration  for  sabotaging  the  2009  Copenhagen  climate  negotiations  through  NSA  spying,  has  issued  a  “call  to  arms“  inviting  all  who  “give  a  damn  about  the  biggest  crisis  our  civilization  has  ever  faced”  to  gather  in  New  York  City  on  Sept.  21  for  a  People’s  Climate  March  to  demand  bold  climate  action  at  the  UN  Summit.  We  ask,  what  could  be  bolder  than  zero  emissions?  Earth  is  the  only  known  habitable  planet  in  the  universe,  making  the  climate  risks  to  humanity  so  great  as  to  warrant  the  utmost  precaution.  Now  is  the  time  for  the  climate  justice  movement  to  rally  around  a  goal  of  zero  emissions,  with  the  U.S.  leading  the  way  by  enacting  zero  emissions  policies  at  the  local,  state  and  federal  levels.  For  the  love  of  humanity,  and  our  children,  we  must  act  now.  Zero  emissions:  because  the  first  step  to  making  things  better  is  to  stop  making  things  worse.  101  The  Lima  Ecosocialist  Declaration  October  6,  2014    -­‐lima-­‐ecosocialist-­‐declaration/  Declaration  of  the  Ecosocialist  International  Network  before  COP20  in  Lima,  Peru  (December  2014)  Translated  by  Quincy  Saul  for  Ecosocialist  Horizons,  affiliate  of  the  Ecosocialist  International  Network.  Our  lives  are  worth  more  than  their  profits!  The  imminent  climate  crisis  that  we  confront  today  is  a  grave  threat  to  the  preservation  of  life  on  the  planet.  Many  academic  and  political  works  have  confirmed  the  fragility  of  life  on  earth  to  temperature  change.  Only  a  few  degrees  can  cause  –  and  are  causing  –  an  ecological  catastrophe  of  incalculable  consequences.  Now  we  are  experiencing  the  deadly  effects  of  this  situation.  The  melting  ice,  the  contamination  of  the  atmosphere,  rising  sea  levels,  desertification,  and  the  increasing  intensity  of  the  weather,  are  all  proof.  It  is  now  fundamental  to  ask  ourselves  who  and  what  is  causing  the  climate  to  change  like  this.  We  urgently  need  to  unmask  all  the  abstract  answers,  which  attempt  to  blame  all  of  humanity.  These  abstract  answers  disconnect  the  current  situation  from  the  historical  dynamics  which  have  emerged  from  fossil  fuel  (coal,  oil  gas)-­‐based  industrialization,  which  causes  global  warming,  and  the  logic  of  capitalism,  which  is  sustained  by  the  private  appropriation  of  wealth,  and  the  conquest  of  profit.  Profit  at  the  cost  of  social  exploitation  and  ecological  devastation:  these  are  two  faces  of  the  same  system,  which  is  the  culprit  of  climate  catastrophe.  (Illustration  by  Seth  Tobocman,  from  “Truth  and  Dare,”  Ecosocialist  Horizons)  In  this  panorama,  the  Conference  of  the  Parties  (COP),  organized  by  diverse  governments  and  funded  by  large  corporations,  confirms  the  responsibility  of  capitalism  for  the  climate  crisis,  by  putting  on  empty  events  without  any  effective  resolutions  capable  of  solving  the  problem.  In  fact,  we  are  moving  backwards,  a  retreat  expressed  in  the  ridiculous  “green  funds”  which  openly  profit  from  pollution.  Sadly,  this  dynamic  is  deepened  through  the  attitudes  sustained  by  multiple  governments  –  facilitating  pollution  and  putting  the  profits  of  corporations  above  the  wellbeing  of  people.  This  can  be  seen  most  strongly  in  the  102  countries  of  the  South,  and  thus  it  is  fundamental  to  comprehend  that  the  dynamics  of  this  system  tend  to  dump  the  global  ecological  crisis  upon  the  shoulders  of  the  oppressed  and  exploited  of  the  earth.  It  is  vital  to  emphasize  the  importance  of  the  diverse  social  and  ecological  struggles  all  over  the  world,  which  propose  to  stop  climate  change  and  the  ecological  crisis  through  the  logic  of  solidarity.  It  is  important  to  note  that  many  of  these  processes  are  launched  and  led  by  women.  Without  a  doubt,  the  Latin  American  scenario  today  exemplifies  the  mix  of  resistance,  self-­‐management  and  processes  of  transformation,  based  on  projects  which  can  unite  new  proposals  with  ancestral  cosmovisions.  One  example  can  be  found  in  the  brave  struggles  of  the  indigenous  peoples  and  campesinos  of  Peru,  in  particular  their  resistance  to  the  Conga  mega-­‐mining  project.  It  is  also  useful  to  focus  our  attention  on  the  experience  of  the  Yasuni  Park,  which  was  the  initiative  of  indigenous  and  ecological  movements  –  to  protect  a  large  region  of  Amazon  rain  forest  from  oil  drilling,  in  exchange  for  payments  from  rich  nations  to  the  people  of  Ecuador.  The  government  of  Rafael  Correa  accepted  the  proposal  for  several  years,  but  recently  decided  to  open  the  park  to  multinational  oil  corporations,  provoking  important  protests.  Another  case  can  be  found  in  the  development  projects  which  the  Brazilian  government  is  attempting  to  carry  out,  which  threaten  a  large  part  of  Amazonia  with  destruction.  From  this  perspective,  there  is  very  little  to  hope  for  at  COP20  this  December  in  Lima,  Peru.  If  there  is  any  escape  from  climate  change  and  the  global  ecological  crisis,  it  will  emerge  from  the  power  of  struggle  and  the  organization  of  the  oppressed  and  exploited  peoples  of  the  world,  with  the  understanding  that  the  struggle  for  a  world  without  ecological  devastation  must  connect  to  the  struggle  for  a  society  without  oppression  or  exploitation.  This  change  must  begin  now,  bringing  together  unique  struggles,  daily  efforts,  processes  of  self-­‐management,  and  reforms  to  slow  the  crisis,  with  a  vision  centered  on  a  change  of  civilization;  a  new  society  in  harmony  with  nature.  This  is  the  central  proposal  of  ecosocialism,  an  alternative  to  our  current  ecological  catastrophe.  Change  the  system,  not  the  climate!  Signatures:  Argentina:  Manuel  Ludueña,  Paulo  Bergel.  Belgium:  Christine  Vanden  Daelen,  Daniel  Tanuro.  Brazil:  Joao  Alfredo  de  Telles  Melo,  Marcos  Barbosa,  José  Corrêa,  Isabel  Loureiro,  Renato  Roseno,  Renato  Cinco,  Henrique  Vieira,  Flávio  Serafini,  Alexandre  Araújo,  Carlos  Bittencourt,  Renato  Gomes.  Canada:  Jonatas  Durand  Folco  (Quebec),  Terisa  Turner.  Spain:  Esther  Vivas  (Cataluña),  Jaime  Pastor,  Justa  Montero,  Mariano  Alfonso,  Teresa  Rodrigues,  Manuel  Gari.  Jorge  Riechmann,  Joaquin  Vega  United  States:  Ariel  Salleh,  Capitalism,  Nature  and  Socialism  (Revue,  USA),  Joel  Kovel,  Leigh  Brownhill,  Qunicy  Saul  ,  Salvatore  Engel  Di  Mauro,  Terran  Giacomini.  France:  Christine  Poupin,  Dominique  Cellier,  Henrik  Davi,  Mathieu  Agostini,  Michel  Bello,  Michael  Löwy,  Vincent  Gay.  Laurent  Garrouste,  Sophie  Ozanne  103  Greece:  Yorgos  Mitralias,  Panos  Totsikas  México  :  Andrés  Lund,  Samuel  González  Contreras.  José  Efraín  Cruz  Marín  Norway:  Anders  Ekeland.  Perú:  Hugo  Blanco.  País  Vasco:  Iñigo  Antepara,  Josu  Egireun,  Mikel  Casado,  Sindicato  ELA.  Ainhara  Plazaola.  Switzerland:  Juan  Tortosa,  Mirko  Locatelli.  Anna  Spillmann,  Félix  Dalang    //  prefiguration@gmail.com  104  Contributors  Patrick  Bond,  a  political  economist,  specializes  in  climate  change,  global  governance,  economic  policy,  environmental  policy  and  civil  society.  His  doctoral  studies  under  David  Harvey’s  supervision  were  at  Johns  Hopkins  University  in  Geography  and  Environmental  Engineering.  He  is  senior  professor  at  the  University  of  KwaZulu-­‐Natal  School  of  Built  Environment  and  Development  Studies.  Since  2004  he  has  directed  the  UKZN  Centre  for  Civil  Society,  which  in  December  2011  hosted  the  “People’s  Space”  counter-­‐summit  to  the  COP17.  Patrick’s  books  include:  BRICS  and  the  Contradictions  of  World  Capitalism  (co-­‐edited  with  Ana  Garcia,  Haymarket  Press,  Pluto  Press,  Aakar  Press  and  Jacana  Press,  2015);  Politics  of  Climate  Justice:  Paralysis  Above,  Movement  Below  (UKZN  Press  2012  –  named  by  the  Guardian  as  one  of  ten  leading  climate  politics  books);  Durban’s  Climate  Gamble:  Trading  Carbon,  Betting  the  Earth  (edited,  Unisa  Press,  2011);  Climate  Change,  Carbon  Trading  and  Civil  Society:  Negative  Returns  on  South  African  Investments  (co-­‐edited  with  Rehana  Dada  and  Graham  Erion  for  UKZN  Press,  2009);  Trouble  in  the  Air:  Global  Warming  and  the  Privatised  Atmosphere  (edited  with  Rehana  Dada  for  the  TransNational  Institute,  2005);  and  Unsustainable  South  Africa:  Environment,  Development  and  Social  Protest  (UKZN  Press  and  Merlin  Press,  2002).  (Publications  archive.)  Dr.  Michael  K.  Dorsey  is  interim  Director  of  the  energy  and  environment  program  at  the  Joint  Center  for  Political  and  Economic  Studies.  He  is  a  Director  on  the  national  board  of  the  Sierra  Club—one  of  the  largest  and  oldest  US  environmental  organizations.  Dorsey  is  a  recognized  expert  on  global  governance,  finance  and  sustainability.  In  1992,  he  was  a  member  of  the  U.S.  State  Department  Delegation  to  the  United  Nations  Conference  on  Environment  and  Development,  “The  Earth  Summit.”  From  1994-­‐96  he  was  a  task  force  member  of  President  William  Jefferson  Clinton’s  Council  on  Sustainable  Development.  In  1997,  in  Glasgow,  Scotland,  Dorsey  was  bestowed  Rotary  International’s  highest  honor,  The  Paul  Harris  Medal  for  Distinguished  Service  to  Humanity.  From  April  2007  until  November  2008  Dr.  Dorsey  was  a  member  of  Senator  Barack  Obama’s  energy  and  environment  Presidential  campaign  team.  In  2010  Lisa  Jackson,  the  US  Environmental  Protection  Agency  (US-­‐EPA)  Administrator,  appointed  Dr.  Dorsey  to  the  EPA’s  National  Advisory  Committee  (NAC).  Administrator  Jackson  reappointed  Dr.  Dorsey  to  the  US-­‐EPA  NAC  in  2012.  In  2013  Dr.  Dorsey  was  made  a  “Full  member”  of  the  Club  of  Rome;  that  same  year  the  National  Journal  named  Dr.  Dorsey  one  of  200  national  “energy  and  environment  expert  insiders”.  John  Foran  has  taught  sociology  at  the  University  of  California,  Santa  Barbara  since  1989.  His  books  include  Fragile  Resistance:  Social  Transformation  in  Iran  from  1500  to  the  Present  (1993,  get  it  free  here)  and  Taking  Power:  On  the  Origins  of  Third  World  Revolutions  (2005).  Since  attending  the  COP15  in  Copenhagen  in  2009,  he  has  taken  constant  inspiration  from  the  global  climate  justice  movement,  which  he  teaches,  researches,  and  speaks  about  whenever  he  can  (he  has  been  accused  of  talking  about  nothing  else).  Foran  is  engaged  in  a  long-­‐term  participatory  action  project  with  the  global  climate  justice  movement,  and  with  Dr.  Richard  Widick,  he  also  co-­‐  directs  the  International  Institute  of  Climate  105  Action  &  Theory  (IICAT)  ()  and  is  a  founding  member  of  the  Climate  Justice  Project,  where  his  blog  posts  can  be  found.  He  is  also  active  in  the  Green  Party,  350.org,  and  System  Change  Not  Climate  Change.  He  has  written  and  writes  for  a  number  of  on-­‐  line  publications  about  these  struggles  (see  his  work  here  and  here).  Pascoe  Sabido  has  been  with  Corporate  Europe  Observatory  in  Brussels  since  January  2013,  focusing  on  industry  influence  over  policy  making  within  the  European  institutions  and  internationally.  His  current  focus  is  on  exposing  the  role  of  dirty  industry  lobbying  in  climate  policy  making  –  at  the  national,  regional  (EU),  and  UN  level.  He  previously  worked  as  an  international  renewable  energy  campaigner  at  Friends  of  the  Earth  England,  Wales  and  Northern  Ireland,  focusing  on  community-­‐owned  and  controlled  energy  alternatives  (see  the  book  chapter  “Reclaiming  Power  –  an  energy  model  for  people  and  the  planet,”  with  Niclas  Hällström,  in  What  Next  Volume  III:  Climate,  Development  and  Equity;  and  the  book  Powering  Africa  Through  Feed-­‐in  Tariffs).  He  previously  worked  at  the  New  Economics  Foundation  in  London,  working  on  social  policy.  Jim  Shultz,  a  native  of  California,  holds  a  bachelor’s  degree  in  political  science  from  UC  Berkeley  and  a  master’s  degree  in  public  administration  from  Harvard  University.  He  has  served  as  staff  to  the  California  Legislature,  as  an  advocate  with  Common  Cause  and  Consumers  Union,  and  as  a  visiting  professor  at  San  Francisco  State  University  and  faculty  at  the  Salzburg  Seminar.  As  the  founder  and  executive  director  of  The  Democracy  Center  since  1992,  Jim  has  led  advocacy  development  programs  in  more  than  two  dozen  countries  across  five  continents,  training  and  counseling  thousands  of  citizen  activists  across  a  wide  range  of  social,  economic,  and  environmental  justice  issues.  He  has  worked  internationally  as  a  consultant  in  close  collaboration  with  organizations  including  UNICEF,  UNDP,  the  Ford  Foundation,  the  Open  Society  Institute,  the  International  Budget  Partnership  and  others.  As  an  advocate,  Jim  has  also  helped  lead  a  variety  of  victorious  citizen  action  campaigns  at  the  state,  national  and  international  level,  including  the  campaign  that  forced  the  Bechtel  Corporation  to  drop  its  $50  million  legal  action  against  Bolivia  following  the  Cochabamba  Water  Revolt.  Jim  is  the  author  and  editor  of  three  books,  including  the  award-­‐winning  The  Democracy  Owners'  Manual  (Rutgers  University  Press,  2002)  and  Dignity  and  Defiance  –  Stories  from  Bolivia's  Challenge  to  Globalization  (UC  Press,  2009).  His  is  also  author  of  a  variety  of  major  reports  on  global  public  policy  issues  and  his  articles  have  appeared  in  newspapers  and  magazines  across  the  US,  Canada  and  Europe.  His  reporting  on  the  Bolivian  Water  Revolt  was  named  top  story  of  2000  by  Project  Censored.  Jim  and  his  wife  Lynn  have  three  children  and  have  lived  in  Cochabamba,  Bolivia  since  1998,  where  he  also  served  for  many  years  as  president  of  an  80-­‐child  orphanage.  Nathan  Thanki  is  from  Belfast,  Ireland  but  is  currently  based  in  Lima,  Peru  where  he  is  supporting  Peruvian  movements  and  organizations  as  they  prepare  a  People’s  Summit  on  Climate  Change  and  a  People’s  March  during  the  UN  negotiations  in  December  2014.  Nathan  has  been  involved  in  environmental  justice  activism  since  he  began  his  undergraduate  degree  at  College  of  the  106  Atlantic  in  Bar  Harbor,  Maine,  in  2011,  through  collectives  like  Earth  in  Brackets  and  the  Tipping  Point  Collective.  He  has  reported  from  multilateral  governmental  and  civil  society  processes  such  as  UNCSD,  UNFCCC,  CBD,  and  the  World  Social  Forum.  Inside  the  negotiations,  Nathan  is  an  active  member  of  several  informal  coordination  networks  as  well  as  the  Youth  constituency,  YOUNGO.  He  has  worked  for  Third  World  Network  (TWN)  to  conduct  research  into  the  landscape  of  adaptation  finance,  economic  costs  of  climate  change  impacts,  traditional  adaptation  technologies  in  agriculture,  and  the  scope  and  spread  of  climate  change  research  centres.  However,  Nathan  does  not  just  follow  the  official  process.  Since  its  founding  in  2012  he  has  served  as  a  member  of  the  Coordinating  Committee  for  the  Global  Campaign  to  Demand  Climate  Justice,  through  which  he  has  worked  on  Reclaim  Power!  -­‐-­‐  a  month  (2013)  and  a  week  (2014)  of  coordinated  global  action  on  energy.  He  has  also  worked  on  grassroots  campaigns  with  Friends  of  the  Earth  in  Belfast.  Brian  Tokar  is  an  activist  and  author,  director  of  the  Institute  for  Social  Ecology,  and  a  lecturer  in  Environmental  Studies  at  the  University  of  Vermont.  He  is  the  author  of  The  Green  Alternative,  Earth  for  Sale,  and  Toward  Climate  Justice:  Perspectives  on  the  Climate  Crisis  and  Social  Change,  which  was  recently  reissued  in  an  expanded  and  revised  edition  by  the  New  Compass  Press.  He  is  an  editor  of  Agriculture  and  Food  in  Crisis  (with  Fred  Magdoff)  and  also  edited  two  collections  on  biotechnology  and  GMOs:  Redesigning  Life?  and  Gene  Traders.  Tokar  is  a  board  member  of  350Vermont,  and  a  contributor  to  the  Routledge  Handbook  of  the  Climate  Change  Movement,  A  Line  in  the  Tar  Sands,  and  other  recent  books.  His  articles  on  environmental  issues  and  popular  movements  appear  in  Z  Magazine  and  Green  Social  Thought,  and  on  websites  such  as  Counterpunch,  ZNet,  and  Toward  Freedom.  He  has  lectured  across  the  US  and  internationally  on  social  ecology  and  the  links  between  environmental  and  social  movements.  Dr.  Richard  Widick  is  a  Visiting  Scholar  at  the  Orfalea  Center  for  Global  &  International  Studies  at  the  University  of  California,  and  Co-­‐  Director  with  John  Foran  of  The  International  Institute  of  Climate  Action  and  Theory  (IICAT),  where  he  publishes  his  environmental  and  climate-­‐focused  cultural  theory,  history  and  analysis.  He  is  author  of  Trouble  in  the  Forest:  California’s  Redwood  Timber  Wars  (2009,  University  of  Minnesota  Press).  In  spring  of  2015  he  will  be  teaching  Dreaming  the  Revolution:  Marx,  Freud,  and  Nietzsche  in  the  German,  Slavic  and  Semitic  Languages  &  Comparative  Literature  Departments  at  the  University  of  California,  Santa  Barbara.  Emily  Williams  is  a  Campaign  Director  with  CSSC  for  the  fossil  fuel  divestment  campaign,  in  which  she  works  with  college  and  university  students  across  the  state  to  support  them  in  their  campaigns  and  grow  them  into  climate  leaders.  She  graduated  from  UCSB  in  2013,  with  a  B.S.  in  Environmental  Studies  and  a  concentration  in  Geographic  Information  Systems,  where  she  co-­‐founded  the  Fossil  Free  UC  campaign.  She  wrote  her  thesis  on  determining  the  financial  harm  UCSB  is  responsible  for  vis-­‐a-­‐vis  its  investments  in  the  coal  industry.  She  attended  COP19  in  Warsaw,  Poland  with  the  Climate  Justice  Project,  a  project  of  the  International  Institute  of  Climate  Action  and  Theory  (),  and  is  a  member  of  the  SustainUS  delegation  to  COP  20  in  Lima,  Peru.  107  Leehi  Yona  grew  up  in  Montreal,  Canada.  After  completing  a  Diploma  of  Collegial  Studies  in  Arts  &  Sciences  with  a  Third  World  Studies  Certificate  at  Marianopolis  College  in  Québec,  she  now  attends  Dartmouth  College,  where  she  is  pursuing  her  undergraduate  studies,  double  majoring  in  Biology  and  Environmental  Studies,  and  minoring  in  Public  Policy.  She  is  deeply  passionate  about  the  intersection  of  science,  policy,  economics,  health,  and  society  as  they  pertain  to  climate  change  and  climate  justice.  She  serves  on  the  Board  of  Directors  of  the  Green  Coalition  -­‐-­‐  a  Montreal-­‐area  green  and  blue  space  conservation  organization  -­‐-­‐  and  founded  the  Green  Schools  Coalition  of  Montreal,  an  alliance  of  the  student  leaders  of  environmental  clubs  and  organizations  in  elementary  and  high  schools  in  the  region.  She  helped  organize  PowerShift  Canada  in  2012  and  PowerShift  USA  in  2013,  has  served  on  the  national  core  team  for  XL  DISSENT,  a  youth-­‐led  act  of  nonviolent  civil  disobedience  against  the  Keystone  XL  pipeline,  and  is  a  lead  organizer  of  the  Divest  Dartmouth  fossil  fuel  disinvestment  campaign.  She  is  on  the  SustainUS  youth  delegation  to  COP20  in  Lima.  Leehi  received  the  Lieutenant  Governor  of  Québec’s  Youth  Medal  in  2010  and  was  named  Canada’s  Top  Environmentalist  under  25  in  2013.