 WORLD NEWS, Monday, December 19, 2016 854 mots, p. 3

Regulator warns Trump on overturning climate policies
By Barney Jopson in Washington

The chief architect of President Barack Obama's climate change policies has warned the incoming Trump administration that US law and the scientific evidence of global warming will constrain any attempt to overturn her work.

With the outlook for global climate action uncertain after the US election, Gina McCarthy, the top US environmental regulator, told the Financial Times that climate change sceptics led by Donald Trump would have limited room for manoeuvre.

"It's going to be a very high burden of proof for them," said Ms McCarthy, the head of the Environmental Protection Agency, outlining why US law would ensure that Mr Trump could not easily abolish climate change regulations.

His presidential victory delivered a shock to global efforts to tackle climate change. Mr Trump vowed in his campaign to withdraw from the 2015 Paris climate pact and to end US funding for UN climate programmes.

The president-elect has embraced the Republican party's doubts on global warming, tweeting in 2012 that it was a hoax invented by China. This month he said it was "a big scam for a lot of people to make a lot of money", but on the scientific evidence declared: "I'm still open-minded. Nobody really knows."

Ms McCarthy said: "I frankly am disappointed that we're still talking about the science of climate, because that really has been long settled."

To replace Ms McCarthy, Mr Trump has nominated Scott Pruitt , a politician who has repeatedly excoriated the EPA and made it his mission to try to scupper her signature achievements.

Ms McCarthy said that, just as she had to provide a scientific foundation for her regulations to curb carbon dioxide emissions, the Trump administration would be required by the Clean Air Act to show that any attempt to tear up the regulations was scientifically justified.

"If they choose [to] develop a different record then they have a right to do that, but it's going to be a very high burden of proof for them, because I have no question that what we have done will be solid from a science perspective.

"They have to figure out why the climate science isn't overwhelming and go back all the way to the Supreme Court to explain why decisions we've already made are no longer correct, and I wouldn't want to have that burden myself."

Ms McCarthy warned of the dangers of clinging to climate change denial like "a religion or a belief system". She insisted that climate sceptics remained a "small group" outside mainstream opinion, even though Mr Trump's victory will put them in positions of power.

As the attorney-general of oil-rich Oklahoma, Mr Pruitt has denounced Ms McCarthy for allegedly violating the law and joined at least eight lawsuits aimed at consigning her work to the scrapheap. Now Mr Trump is offering him a chance to officially dismantle it. After his nomination was announced this month the green group 350.org called Mr Pruitt a "fossil fuel industry puppet" and one left-leaning news website published a story headlined "The End of the EPA?"

Ms McCarthy thinks not. She predicted that Mr Pruitt would find the reality of office to be sobering. "If you look at some of the background of Scott Pruitt and others, they don't do environmental work," she said. "So some of their arguments don't really rest in the kind of record that you need and the kind of authority that we're given."

With an overwhelming majority of scientists agreeing that humans have caused global warming, Ms McCarthy warned that questioning that conclusion jeopardised the US's credibility as a leader in other science-dependent fields. "People need to remember that you can't just selectively undermine the science in one area without undermining science everywhere."

Noting that most of the rest of the world had pledged to keep cutting fossil fuel pollution despite Mr Trump's vow to quit the Paris deal, Ms McCarthy said: "We're going to be in the back. And we're going to be in a very lonely place. I think it's only us and Nicaragua that would be there. It's sort of not the company you want to keep."

But she argued that regardless of government policy, the US energy market was moving towards cleaner energy simply because the cost of wind and solar power had dropped so much. "If the market is valuing renewables because it's cheaper energy, then I don't know why anyone would disrupt that," she said.

Ms McCarthy met Mr Pruitt at a September court hearing over a lawsuit in which he argued that the EPA exceeded its authority by telling states to cut carbon pollution from power plants. The lawsuit has already frozen the implementation of the power sector regulations, the centrepiece of Mr Obama's climate policy.

Before the case reaches the Supreme Court, the Trump administration could choose to abandon the legal fightback that Mr Obama began, leaving the rules to die. In other areas, if the new EPA chief wants to avoid having to justify the repeal of McCarthy regulations, he will have the option of initiating a go-slow on their implementation or denying them funding.
