The Accord broke through years of negotiating gridlock to achieve four critical goals:1. For the  first time, developed and developing countries representing more than 80 percentof the world’s global warming pollution agreed to reduce their emissions (see over for details). Developing country participants include China, India, Brazil, Mexico, Indonesia, South Africa, and South Korea. By the end of January 2010, all of the big emitters have recorded their commitments officially in the Accord (in Appendix I and Appendix II).22. For the  first time, China is officially in the game—putting emission cuts on the table and agreeing to open its books to international scrutiny.3 The Accord allows the international community to evaluate countries’ adherence to their commitments. The United States, Europe, Japan, China, India, and other large developedand developing countries have agreed to reporton emission levels, actions, policies, and progress toward their commitments at least every two years. These reports will be subject to international consultation and analysis under agreed-upon guidelines.4. Countries agreed on actions to stem the loss of the world’s tropical forests. The agreement outlines the basic architecture and  financing for international forest protection, which accounts for approximately 15 percent of global emissions.The Copenhagen Accord delivers what America needs from the international process: a commitment from the leaders of all key countries to join together to curb global warming. But to fulfill that promise, the Senate must act swiftly on comprehensive energy and climate change legislation to launch a clean energy economy at home and ensure global leaders live up to their end of the bargain.The Copenhagen AccordFoundations for International Action on Climate ChangeThe Copenhagen Accord, hammered out in December by President Obama and leaders of more than two dozen key countries, is a significant step forward in forging international cooperation to tackle global warming.1 These signatories—including the United States, China, India, the European Union, and Japan—represent more than 80 percent of the world’s global warming pollution from energy and deforestation. Also included are some of the nations most vulnerable to the impacts of climate change.More than 120 countries in the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change have accepted this agreement.Energy Facts
The Copenhagen AccordFoundations for International Action on Climate ChangeThe Copenhagen process has shifted climate politics, compelling all big countries to actand increase their ambition to cut emissions. Countries representing more than 80 percent of the world’s emissions have now signaled that they will undertake clear steps to reduce their emissions, including the following:ChinaCommitted to cut its greenhouse gas emissions intensity (emissions per unit of GDP) by 40 to45 percent below 2005 levels by 2020. Chinahas also set energy and forestry targets: to build up energy from non-fossil fuels to 15 percent of China’s primary energy consumption by 2020, and to increase forest cover by 40 million hectares by 2020.IndiaCommitted to reducing its emissions intensity by 20 to 25 percent below 2005 levels by 2020. Tomeet and exceed this goal, India is increasing fuel efficiency standards by 2011; adopting building energy codes by 2012; increasing forest cover to sequester 10 percent of India’s annual emissions; increasing the fraction of India’s electricity derived from wind, solar, and small hydro to 20 percent by 2020 (from the current level of 8 percent).BrazilCommitted to reduce emissions growth by 36 to 39 percent below business- as-usual by 2020—a levelestimated to cut Brazil’s emissions to 1994 levels. This commitment was recently signed into lawby President Lula of Brazil. Brazil also pledged to cut deforestation by 80 percent from historic levels by 2020.IndonesiaCommitted to reduce emissions by 26 percent below business as usual by 2020, and by as muchas 41 percent with international support.South AfricaCommitted to reduce emissions growth 34 percent by 2020 and to 42 percent in 2025with  financial, technological, and capacity- building support from the developed world.South KoreaCommitted to cut economy-wide emissions to 30 percent belowthe projected 2020levels—reducing emissions to around 4 percent below 2005 levels.MexicoCommitted to reduce its greenhouse gas emissions up to 30 percent compared to business as usual levelsby 2020, provided there is adequate  financial and technological support.