 NATIONAL NEWS - LABOUR CONFERENCE, Wednesday, September 24, 2008 479 mots, p. 2

Climate change move chills business
By Jean Eaglesham, Chief Political Correspondent

Business expressed concern at Gordon Brown's signal of a potentially dramatic rise in climate change targets, but insisted it was "quite comfortable" with the rest of a speech welcomed by the unions as a lurch to the left.

The seemingly paradoxical reactions from the business groups and trade unions - both welcomed the prime minister's apparent support for their members - appeared a sign of battles postponed, rather than an outbreak of consensus. Once Downing Street spells out what lies behind the rhetoric, it seems inevitable that some of the expectations springing from the speech will be confounded.

One area of prime ministerial rhetoric being analysed carefully by business was climate change.

Mr Brown's statement that he was "asking the climate change committee to report by October on the case for by 2050 not a 60 per cent cut in our carbon emissions but an 80 per cent cut" was welcomed by green groups.

Meanwhile, the unions, which have spent the conference calling for a windfall tax on utilities and lambasting City fat cats, appeared to scent a triumphant reversion to old- style socialism.

Derek Prentis, general secretary of Unison, hailed the speech as showing "clear red water between Labour and the Conservatives". Derek Simpson, joint leader of the Unite union, applauded a "real Labour speech from a real Labour leader".

But business focused instead on Mr Brown's assurance that "we are and will always be a pro-enterprise, pro-business and pro-competition government".

The Forum of Private Business said it was "incredible" Mr Brown could laud the creation of 1m small and medium-sized businesses under Labour as "not just a number" but evidence of changes such as "the local businessman who's taken on two local teenagers as apprentices". The forum pointed out the number of businesses employing people had remained static at 1.2m since 1997. "In future, Mr Brown should remind himself of the arithmetic of his own statistics when he is called to defend his record on supporting small businesses," said Phil Orford, the forum's chief executive.

Employers reacted positively less to what the prime minister said than to what he deliberately did not say, in terms of resisting the left's demands for punitive taxes or regulation.

"It was a good speech - much stronger and better delivered than he usually does, with an overall positive message," said Miles Templeman, director-general of the Institute of Directors. "We're quite comfortable from a business point of view. He didn't say much about business but he didn't throw a sop to the left wing either."

Richard Lambert, director-general of the CBI employers' group, said the words on business and markets were "unexceptional stuff".

Business found nothing in the broad brush statements of regulatory principles on which the prime minister intended to "rebuild the world financial system". The commitments to ensuring "transparency" and "sound banking" were seen as a statement of commonsense. The way such objectives are implemented may be an-other matter altogether.

Mr Lambert told the FT "no one could disagree" with the assertion that markets should not be left to function untrammelled by any regulation. But he warned: "There were no details about how we're going to get there, other than that regulation needed to be global. There's an awful lot to be fleshed out before we can understand what he meant."

Stuart Fraser, chairman of the City of London's policy committee, said it was essential the "inevitable" changes to financial services regulation after the markets turmoil were "carefully thought through, fully consulted on with the industry and not just a knee-jerk reaction to the current crisis".

Editorial Comment, Page 18
