 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR, Tuesday, April 15, 2008 385 mots, p. 12

Misguided case against climate change action

From Dr Robert T. Watson.

Sir, Nigel Lawson's perspective that the UK and Europe are over-reacting to the threat of human-induced climate change is substantively wrong and ignores a significant body of scientific, technological and economic evidence ("Stop this foolish overreaction to climate change", April 7). While global action is needed to mitigate greenhouse gas emissions, UK and European leadership is essential.

The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change, which shared the 2007 Nobel peace prize, is the most authoritative voice on the current understanding of climate change. Unfortunately, Lord Lawson selectively quotes the IPCC report while perhaps not completely understanding the current scientific and economic debate. There is no doubt that the earth's climate has warmed since the pre-industrial revolution and that future warming is inevitable, primarily due to human activities; ie, the use of fossil fuels to produce energy and tropical deforestation. The rapid rise in surface temperature since 1950 cannot be ascribed to any natural phenomena, and in contrast to what Lord Lawson reports, global average temperatures continued to increase between 1998 and 2007.

The IPCC reported in 2007 that without concerted international action to reduce greenhouse gas emissions the planet could warm an additional 1.1°C to 6.4°C during this century, with predominantly adverse consequences for most ecological and socio-economic sectors and human health, with poor people being most vulnerable. Climate change is a major environmental, development and security issue that, left unaddressed, threatens a sustainable future for both developed and developing countries. As noted by the Stern Report the costs of inaction exceed the costs of action, ie mitigating greenhouse gas emissions. There are many cost-effective energy production and use technologies that can currently be used to reduce greenhouse gas emissions. In addition, there are many technologies that are pre-commercial that can be brought to the marketplace in the near future (with appropriate policy frameworks) to further reduce emissions cost effectively, for example, carbon capture and storage, future generation biofuels, electric cars.

Basically, Lord Lawson's argument that action to reduce emissions will hurt the economy is misguided. It is inaction that will impact adversely on economic growth, cause social disruption and lead to further destruction of the world's natural resources, land, water and biodiversity.

The time for action is now. The UK is demonstrating appropriate political leadership and is committed to addressing this issue by funding scientific research, investing in new low-carbon technologies, which has already become a significant growth industry in the UK context, adapting to projected changes in climate and providing international leadership in developing and implementing a long-term equitable global regulatory agreement involving all major emitters to reduce greenhouse gas emissions.

Robert T. Watson,

Chief Scientific Adviser to the Department for Environment, Food and Rural Affairs

Former Chair, IPCC
