 LETTERS TO THE EDITOR, Monday, March 24, 2008 419 mots, p. 10

EU's dangerous decision on climate change that may lead to a trade war

From Carl B. Hamilton MP.

Sir, A profoundly ill-conceived decision by the European Union leaders on March 14 could pave the way for a global trade war over climate policy. The decision opens up the possibility for the EU to impose trade barriers on countries with a less ambitious climate agenda than the EU. The risk of "carbon leakage" can be allowed to trigger compensatory tariffs on products imported from countries outside of the EU's emission trading system. Sadly, the decision satisfies a cynical alliance of environmentalists and Europe's energy intensive industry.

First, EU-initiated trade barriers could provoke a global trade war between the EU on the one hand and countries such as the US, China, India and Brazil on the other. European climate tariffs would in turn lead to raised tariffs on EU products exported to these countries. China, for instance, could insist on tariffs that reflect western Europe's three times higher emissions per capita - a potentially high cost for European companies selling to China.

Above all, a global trade war would hurt the prospects of successful negotiations for a new global agreement on capping greenhouse gas emissions. Winning trade disputes in the World Trade Organisation could become a higher priority than an agreement fighting climate change. EU climate tariffs would be construed as confirming developing countries' old suspicion that rich countries' environmental arguments is protectionism in disguise. The follow-up agreement to the Doha round is another likely victim.

Second, German and French governments are wrong and follow lobbyists' train of thought when they argue for border protection of energy-intensive industries. In fact, it is not sectors that compete with each other on the global market, but the quality and price of individual products are being compared. The steel industries in Europe, for example in my home country Sweden, rarely produce the same products as their competitors in China, India or the US. To survive, European steel companies should produce more sophisticated and skill-intensive products than China and India. The argument is also often applicable to EU competition with energy-intensive US companies. Border protection formulated to cover entire sectors and affecting hundreds, or thousands, of different products would in any case be far too encompassing.

Third, how should EU deal with countries outside the its climate policy, but with which it wants close relations and preferential trade agreements? Should they be exempted from the EU's climate tariffs? This concerns all countries around the Mediterranean, EU candidate states such as Croatia and Turkey, countries with a "membership perspective" and a large group of former colonies. Exempting these countries would make them attractive places for re-exportation of goods to the EU from, for example. China, India, the US and Brazil, as the goods could escape the EU's climate tariffs with the help of a little corruption and a change of origin.

From every perspective, climate tariffs would create a big bag of problems for the EU's external relations and be a counter-productive climate policy.

Carl B. Hamilton,

Liberal, Swedish Parliament, and Professor of International Economics
